Chandrakirti’s Auto-Commentary to Entering the Middle Way In the language of India: Madhyamaka-avatārabhāṣyanāma In the language of Tibet: Dbu ma la ’jug pa’i bshad pa zhes bya ba In English: Commentary to Entering the Middle Way
Homage to the noble youthful Mañjuśrī.
The First Ground: Joyous
With the aim to compose an introduction (avatāra) to the Middle Way (madhyamaka) that may help one access (avatāra) the Middle Way Treatise, it seemed appropriate to present at first a praise to the illustrious lady Great Compassion, the perfect cause of buddhahood and characterised by being the complete protection for all the untold numbers of defenceless sentient beings without exception trapped in the prison of cyclic existence, even before praising the true and complete buddhas and the bodhisattvas. Hence, I expressed two stanzas, this and the following one: From mighty sages hearers and half-buddhas come, While buddhas from the bodhisattvas are conceived. Compassion, non-duality, awakening mind – These are what serve as causes of the victor’s heirs. (1.1)
The illustrious buddhas are here termed mighty sages (munīndra) because they possess perfect mastery as unsurpassed lords of Dharma, are also perfect supreme lords over the hearers, solitary buddhas and bodhisattvas, and because the hearers and so forth are governed by their command. From them the hearers and so forth come, meaning that they are born from them. How so? Due to the fact that, when buddhas appear and teach the unmistaken ways of dependent origination, they engage with that teaching through the stages of learning, contemplation and meditation, and according to their particular propensities will then actualise the final complete result of the hearers and so forth.
For some it may be that, although they do become erudite, realising the ultimate truth through just listening to the teachings on interdependent origination, they do not attain transcendence in their present existence. Although this might be the case, those who practice what is taught will without doubt attain it in a future lifetime when the result of their yearning ripens, in the same way that the ripening of karma will definitely come to fruition. As Āryadeva states: When reality is understood, though here They may not reach transcendence, They will certainly attain it effortlessly In another lifetime, just as with karma.1 That is also why the Middle Way Treatise states: When the complete buddhas do not appear And the hearers as well are no more, The wisdom of the solitary buddhas Will be actualised independently.2
They are called hearers (śrāvaka) because they facilitate attainment of the result of the instructions: ‘It has been completed. After this I will not know another existence.’ Alternatively, they are hearers because they hear (śrutvā) about the supreme result or the path of unsurpassed true and complete awakening from the tathāgatas, and then proclaim (śrāvaṇatva) it to those who aspire to it. Just as the White Lotus of Sacred Dharma Sutra states: Protector, today we have become hearers, And will now proclaim supreme awakening. We will clarify the awakening statements. Thus we are like the formidable hearers.3 Although bodhisattvas also fit this description, the hearers proclaim it without actually practicing in accord with it, which is not the case for bodhisattvas.
The term buddha, awakened to reality, applies to all three: hearers, solitary buddhas and unsurpassed true and complete buddhas. Hence, the term buddha is here used to refer to solitary buddhas. These surpass the hearers due to their comparatively excellent development of merit and wisdom, but are inferior to the true and complete buddhas as they lack their accumulation of merit and wisdom, great compassion, two types of omniscience and so on. Hence, they are half-. They are solitary buddhas (pratyekabuddha) since they develop wisdom without being taught and gain awakening solely for themselves. As has been explained, the hearers and solitary buddhas are from mighty sages … come, in the sense that they originate from the tathāgatas teaching the Dharma.
From where then, are the mighty sages born? As stated, while buddhas from the bodhisattvas are conceived. But aren’t the bodhisattvas described as children of the victor because they too are born from the teachings of the tathāgatas? Why then is it said that that the illustrious buddhas are born from bodhisattvas? That is indeed true. Still, there are two reasons why the bodhisattvas are considered the cause for the illustrious buddhas: because they are the particular circumstance and because they inspire the adoption.
That they are the particular circumstance means that that which acts as the cause for the circumstance of being a tathāgata is the circumstance of being a bodhisattva. That they inspire the adoption refers to the case of noble Mañjuśrī who as a bodhisattva was the very first to inspire the illustrious Śākyamuni and the other tathāgatas to adopt the mind of awakening. Being thus regarded as the principal cause that enabled the final result, it is taught that the tathāgatas are born from the bodhisattvas.
Bodhisattvas are therefore to be esteemed, since it is recognised that they are the immensely valuable perfect cause; since expressing veneration for the cause automatically implies veneration also for the result; since the blessed buddhas teach that just as when a great medicinal tree that will definitely yield limitless fruits is still at the stage of a sprout and so on, and its leaves are tender, one must take care to protect it; and since the multitudes of sentient beings they encounter that have a predilection for the three vehicles will with certainty be impelled towards the Greater Vehicle.
As stated in the noble Heap of Jewels Sutra: Kāśyapa, it is like when honour is shown to the new moon and not the full moon. Just so, Kāśyapa, should those who have faith in me pay homage to the bodhisattvas, not to the tathāgatas. Why? Because it is from bodhisattvas that the tathāgatas arise. And from the tathāgatas all the hearers and solitary buddhas arise.4 With this, it has been established through reasoning and scripture that the tathāgatas are born from the bodhisattvas.
What then is the cause of the bodhisattvas? As was stated: compassion, non-duality, awakening mind – these are what serve as causes of the victor’s heirs. Compassion means sympathy (anukampā), and its aspects and nature will be explained. Non-dual mind is the intelligence that is free from the two extremes of entities, absence of entities and so forth.
The awakening mind is described in the noble Omnipresent Dharmas Sutra: Through the mind of awakening the bodhisattva will come to understand all dharmas: that all dharmas are equal in the dharmadhātu. All dharmas, being adventitious and unstable, are empty of something to be known and a knower. When within this mere recognition a bodhisattva gives rise to the sentiment of thinking that, ‘All beings must reach the recognition that this is the nature of things,’ that is what we call the awakening mind of the bodhisattva. It is the mind that aims for the benefit and happiness of all beings; that aims for the unsurpassed; a tender mind of love; an irreversible mind of compassion; a joyous mind that knows no regret; an equanimous mind without stains; an unchanging mind of emptiness; an unobscured mind not encumbered by labelling; a non-abiding mind free from aspirations.5 That the principal causes of the bodhisattvas are these three – compassion, non-dual intelligence and the mind of awakening – is expressed in the Precious Garland: Its roots are the mind of awakening Firm as the king of mountains, Compassion without prejudice And wisdom not tied to duality.6
Since compassion is the very root of the mind of awakening and wisdom of non-duality, the following was stated with the wish to illustrate the preeminence of compassion: Since love is like the seed for the abundant crop Of victorhood, is like the water for its growth, Like maturation for its yield to then endure, It’s therefore that I praise compassion first of all. (1.2) Just as seeds, water and the process of ripening are the essential prerequisites in the beginning, middle and end respectively for a perfect harvest of grains and so forth on the outer level, it is compassion that is said to be the very prerequisite in the three periods for the perfect harvest of the victors. Likewise, when others are experiencing the suffering of suffering, a compassionate individual wanting to protect all suffering sentient beings without exception, will develop the firm resolve: ‘I must by all means deliver this world from suffering and bring it to the state of buddhahood.’ And since one will not be able to bring this commitment to fruition if one has discarded the wisdom of non-duality, it is essential to engage in it through the wisdom of non-duality. Thus, the seed of all the qualities of buddhahood is compassion. As stated in the Precious Garland: What rational individual would disparage The Greater Vehicle which teaches Compassion as the prerequisite of all And wisdom that is free from stains?7
Though the mind of awakening has been generated, if one has not repeatedly moistened it with the water of compassion, preparations for the vast fruition will not be accumulated, and one will inevitably transcend to the nirvana of hearers and solitary buddhas. And, although one may reach the state of the boundless fruition, without fully ripened compassion this will not become a lasting resource, and the unbroken one-to-one lineage of the great assembly of noble fruition will not flourish for long.
Now, to clarify the distinctive forms of compassion according to how they relate to particular objects, I wished to express this as an homage: At first, the though of ‘I’ and clinging to a self; Then ‘This is mine’ as they become attached to things. I bow to that compassion which sees every life As powerless as buckets on a water-wheel. (1.3) In the world, self-clinging develops before the clinging of ownership, as one imputes the idea ‘it exists’ onto a non-existent self and ends up clinging to it as real. And then, with the thought, ‘This is mine,’ clinging to all other objects not included within this self-clinging comes.
The worldly state of clinging to self and mine is (1) to be tightly bound by the ropes of karma and afflictions; (2) to be reliant on the movements of consciousness, the operator of the machinery; (3) to be ceaselessly rambling through the depths of the great well of cyclic existence, from its peak to the Incessant hell; (4) to descend effortlessly of one’s own accord but having to be drawn up with great effort; (5) not to be following a fixed order of prior, latter and middling components when it comes to the torments (saṃkleśa) of afflictions, such as ignorance, of karma and of birth; and (6) to each day be battered by the suffering of suffering and the suffering of change – and hence to never transcend this water-wheel condition. Since the bodhisattva, motivated by immense compassion for those tormented by suffering, develops the wish to protect them, homage is offered to the illustrious lady great compassion before anything else. This is the compassion of the bodhisattvas that is focussed on sentient beings.
To illustrate what the compassion focussed on dharmas and without a focus relate to, it was stated: Just like the moon reflected in a rippling pond, They see them waver, empty of inherent being. To this one should add the line, ‘I bow to such compassion.’ In a pool of limpid water slightly rippled by a mild breeze, the image of the moon keeps breaking up on the surface of what supports its reflection, and the combination of these two is visible as a clearly perceptible thing. The supreme ones see that these two facets illustrate the nature of things, namely moment-by-moment impermanence and absence of intrinsic nature. In the same way, bodhisattvas governed by compassion see that beings dwelling in the vast blue water of ignorance filling the ocean of the view of identity (satkāyadṛṣṭi) stirred by the winds of mistaken concepts, appearing in front of them as reflections of their individual karma, moment-by-moment encounter the suffering of impermanence and are empty of inherent existence. The bodhisattvas then develop the wish to help them fully attain the state of awakening, which is like the annihilator of the suffering of impermanence they undergo with respect to these two facts; which is a perfect source of the nectar of the sublime Dharma; which is characterised by a total reversal of all mistaken concepts; and is the true friend of all the world.8 Having bowed to their compassion focussed on sentient beings, focussed on dharmas and without a focus …
…, wishing then to speak of the ten divisions of the awakening mind of bodhisattvas, regarding the first mind of awakening:
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
----------
The victor’s offspring filled with these compassionate thoughts Will feel compelled to rescue each and every one. (1.4) They dedicate just like Samantabhadra prayed, Established on the Joyous which is called the first. The various levels encompassed by the bodhisattvas’ compassion of undefiled wisdom receive the name grounds (bhūmi) since they are supports for qualities. We designate ten particular grounds with the names Joyous (pramudita) and so forth, not because there is any distinction with respect to their actual nature, but based on there being an increasing number of qualities, attainment of superior powers, advancement in the perfections such as generosity, and flourishing maturation. As stated: Even the wise cannot express or see The path a bird takes in the sky; And likewise, the grounds of the victor heirs Cannot be expressed, much less heard about.9 The bodhisattva ground Joyous is the initial resolve of the bodhisattvas, while the last and tenth resolve is Cloud of Dharma.
As explained, the mind of the bodhisattva is at this point seized by the special compassion which sees the lack of inherent nature of beings, and filled with these compassionate thoughts they dedicate just like Samantabhadra prayed. Thus it is given the name Joyous, indicating that this result has non-dual wisdom as its cause, and is considered the first. Generating the resolve for the first time, the bodhisattva makes ten innumerable hundred thousand aspirations, such as those expressed in the Ten Great Aspirations, and all of these are included within the Bodhisattva Samantabhadra’s Aspiration. In order to include every aspiration without omission, the Aspiration of Samantabhadra is here singled out.
Just as, in the vehicle of the hearers we designate eight types of hearers who have entered or abide in the result,10 in the Greater Vehicle as well we have the bodhisattvas’ ten bodhisattva grounds. And just as we do not consider that someone having reached the stage of propensity for definite separation11 (nirvedhabhagīya) has reached the stage of entry into the first result, the same is true for the potential bodhisattvas. As taught in the Cloud of Jewels Sutra: The state just before the attainment of the first ground, having the nature of magnificent aspirations aimed at great conduct, is a ground where the bodhisattva has not yet generated the mind of awakening.12 It continues, explaining about this instance of aspiring towards practice: O son of good family. Take the example of a universal monarch, who though he transcends the ranks of humans, has not yet reached the ranks of gods. Just so, a bodhisattva can be completely beyond worldly people, hearers and solitary buddhas, without having reached the ultimate ground of the bodhisattva.13
As they enter Joyous, the first ground: At present, signifying what they have attained, The epithet of bodhisattva is now theirs. (1.5) Having attained this mind they are in every respect beyond the level of ordinary beings, at this stage only referred to as bodhisattvas and nothing else, because they are now noble beings. As stated for instance in the Illustrious Lady in Two Thousand Five Hundred Lines: Bodhisattva is an epithet for sattvas14 whose insight has awakened (anubuddha), who have gained realisation (buddha) and understanding (jñāna) of all dharmas. How do they understand them? As non-existent (abhūta), unproduced (asaṃbhūta) and incorrect (vitatha), and not the way immature ordinary beings conceive of them; not how immature ordinary beings ascertain them. Therefore they are called bodhisattvas, beings with awakened insight. How so? Awakening is not conceived. Awakening is not accomplished. Awakening is not ascertained. O Suvikrāntavikrāmin. The Tathāgata did not attain awakening, because no dharmas can be attained. Since no dharmas are ascertained it is called awakening (bodhi). Likewise, we say, ‘the awakening of Buddha’ – but that actually defies expression. If, Suvikrāntavikrāmin, when generating the mind of awakening they think, ‘We shall generate this mind of awakening’, and there is a sense of this awakening being an existent awakening towards which, ‘We generate this mind’, then they are not called bodhisattvas but generating sattvas (utpannasattva).15 Why? They are fixated on giving rise to it. They are focussed on this mind. They are determined to awaken.16
And likewise, among other things it is stated that: Awakening is without characteristics; it is free from the nature of characteristics. The one for whom this realisation dawns awakens (bodhi) – but that actually defies expression. O Suvikrāntavikrāmin. Since the realisation of dharmas has dawned, they are called bodhisattvas. But for those, Suvikrāntavikrāmin, who have not understood these dharmas, who haven’t realised them but still consider themselves bodhisattvas, the grounds of the bodhisattvas are a long way off. They are far from the dharmas of bodhisattvas, and are deceiving the world of gods, humans and demigods by using the name bodhisattva. O Suvikrāntavikrāmin. If a word was all it took to be a bodhisattva, all sentient beings would be bodhisattvas. Thus, Suvikrāntavikrāmin, the grounds of the bodhisattva is more than just a term.17
And when gaining the mind of awakening thus described, not only are they solely referred to by the term bodhisattva, but also: They’ve taken birth as kin of the tathāgatas; Their fetters three have thus been utterly dispelled. These bodhisattvas now endowed with utmost joy Are able to make hundred world systems vibrate. (1.6) The bodhisattva has taken birth as kin of the tathāgatas, since they now transcend all the levels of ordinary beings, hearers and solitary buddhas, and have begun to follow the path leading to the ground of the tathāgatas, Fully Illumined. Seeing at this point directly the lack of a personal self, their fetters three have thus been utterly dispelled – the view of identity, doubt and the thought that moral discipline and religious observance is the most excellent thing – since these will not now reappear. When one does not see the actual reality of things, one imputes a self, adopting the identity view; and one entertains doubt, considering the possibility of taking others paths. Not otherwise. Arriving at certainty18 (niścayapraveśa) they gain the accompanying qualities and are free from faults that conflict with the grounds. With that, an extraordinary sense of delight is born, and with this increasing joyous experience the most supreme joy becomes theirs. And it is because this exceptional joy rises up that this ground receives the name Joyous. They are able to shake a hundred world-systems.
As they’re progressing ever higher, ground to ground, The paths to lower states have now been fully barred, All ordinary states of being brought to close, And they are now akin to the eighth noble one. (1.7) As they gain familiarity with the Dharma thus realised, and are greatly inspired as they progress to the second ground and further, they are progressing ever higher, ground to ground. In short, just as noble stream-enterers are free from faults and gain qualities when realising the noble Dharma that agrees with them, the bodhisattvas realising the grounds gain the accompanying qualities and eliminate faults. The example of the stream-enterer is here employed to clarify this.
Concerning these bodhisattvas: Though just the first taste of complete awakening, In strength of merit they now conquer and surpass The solitary buddhas and the Sage-speech born; This presents a further distinction in line with the following statements found in the noble Liberation of Maitreya: O son of good family. It is like the example of a prince, who immediately after birth carries the signs of royalty, and by virtue of his supreme hereditary rank surpasses everyone even among the senior and most important ministers. Just so, as soon as the novice bodhisattva has given rise to the mind of awakening he is born into the family of tathāgatas, the kings of Dharma, and through the power of his awakening mind and compassion surpasses the hearers and solitary buddhas who have long practiced pure conduct. … O son of good family. It is like the example of a fledgling of the mighty garuḍa that soon after birth possesses a powerful wing-thrust and an immaculate eye-sight that cannot be rivalled by any mature birds belonging to other species. Just so, when the mighty garuḍa youngling bodhisattva gives rise to the initial mind of awakening and is born into the family-lineage of the powerful sky-soaring garuḍa tathāgatas, the powerful wing-thrust of his courageous mind dedicated to the state of complete omniscience and his immaculate eye-sight of altruism cannot be matched by any of the hearers or solitary buddhas who have practiced renunciation for a hundred thousand aeons.19
Unrivalled in their insight too on Far Advanced. (1.8) As stated in the noble Ten Grounds: O victor-heirs. Take as example the prince who once born into the royal family holds royal characteristics. The status of royalty is such that his birth alone is enough to surpass the whole assembly of ministers, even though he does not do so in terms of analytical ability. But once he has come of age and developed his analytical abilities, he will completely surpass the ministers in every way. O victor-heirs. The same is the case for bodhisattvas. Once they have developed this resolve they surpass the hearers and solitary buddhas in terms of their altruistic determination, even though they do not do so in terms of analytical ability. But bodhisattvas dwelling on the seventh bodhisattva-ground completely surpass the hearers and solitary buddhas in every way due to the exalted nature of their wisdom’s range.20 One should take this as saying that it is only once having reached Far Advanced that bodhisattvas surpass hearers and solitary buddhas also in terms of analytical ability. Those on the lower grounds do not.
This scriptural citation clearly states that hearers and solitary buddhas too understand the lack of intrinsic nature of all dharmas. If this was not the case, and they did not have the realisation of the absence of intrinsic nature of things, they would be surpassed in terms of analytical abilities by the bodhisattva with the initial resolve just as is the case for those free from worldly desires; just like non-Buddhists, they would not abandon all subtle propensities (anuśaya) that perpetuate the three realms, because of still mistakenly perceiving that forms and so forth have intrinsic nature; and they would not even realise the selflessness of the person, because imputation of a self relies on observing the aggregates.
As stated in the Precious Garland: As long as one clings to the aggregates There will be clinging to an ‘I’. And with clinging to ‘I’ there is karma, Which leads to birth. This threefold path has no beginning, middle or end. It revolves by virtue of these reciprocal causes Just like a circle created by The arc of a whirling firebrand. But when it can’t be found to come from itself, From others, or both at any point in the three times, This self-clinging ceases, And with it karma and birth.21 It continues: Just like the eye is mistaken When it perceives the firebrand’s arc, The faculties too perceive The objects of the present. The faculties and the sense-objects Are held to be of the nature of the five elements, But since the individual elements are unreal, These are also in fact unreal. If the elements were held to be distinct, It would follow that fire could burn without fuel. If they merge they lose their defining characteristics. The same conclusion applies to the other elements. Since elements are unreal in either case, Their combination too is unreal. And since their combination is unreal, Form is also in actual fact unreal. Since in and of themselves, consciousness, Feeling, perception and formation too Are in every way unreal in terms self-nature, They are ultimately unreal. Just as one assumes that it is happiness When suffering is removed, And when happiness is prevented One has the impression of suffering, This lack of any intrinsic nature Eliminates the thirst to find happiness And the desire to be free from suffering – Those who see this are therefore freed. You may ask, ‘Who sees this?’ Conventionally, we say it’s the mind. But without mental events there is no mind. Being unreal, we do not assert that it exists. When one gains a proper understanding Of the unreality of beings, There is no basis, nothing to adopt, one transcends,22 Just like a fire that has run out of fuel.23
One may ask, ‘Is it just the bodhisattvas who see this lack of intrinsic nature?’ It is not so, because these statements were made with respect to hearers and solitary buddhas. How can one deduce that? Because it is only after these statements that the bodhisattvas are spoken of, starting with: The bodhisattva also sees this, And is determined to reach awakening. It is only because of his compassion That he remains in existence until awakening. And in the sutras that were taught to the hearers it is stated among other things that: Form is like a mass of foam, Feeling as a water-bubble, Perception similar to a mirage, Formations are like plantain trees, Consciousness like an illusion – Thus spoke The Sun’s Kinsman.24 In this way, compounded phenomena (saṃskāra) are scrutinised by means of examples such as a mass of foam, water-bubbles, a mirage, the plantain tree’s trunk and an illusion.
Explaining exactly this point, the master said: According to the Greater Vehicle, Emptiness is non-arising; for the others it’s destruction. But destruction and non-arising Should in fact be considered the same.25 Similarly: In the Instructions to Kātyāyana The Illustrious One refuted Both existence and non-existence Through his knowledge of entities and non-entities.26 Some might think, ‘If the selflessness of dharmas is also taught in the vehicle of the hearers, then the teachings of the Greater Vehicle are redundant.’ Such a way of thinking is seen to contradict both reasoning and scripture. The teachings of the Greater Vehicle are not solely concerned with the selflessness of dharmas, but also with the bodhisattvas’ grounds, perfections, aspirations, great compassion and so forth, with dedication, the two accumulations and the inconceivable nature of reality (dharmatā).
As stated in the Precious Garland: In the vehicle of the hearers there is no mention Of the aspiration of the bodhisattva, Nor of dedicating one’s activities – How could one then become a bodhisattva? … In the sutras there is no mention Of following the bodhisattva conduct. But this is explained in the Greater Vehicle, Which should therefore be accepted by the wise.27 Also, as they clarify the selflessness of dharmas, there is good reason for the teachings of the Greater Vehicle, since this is taught there extensively. In the hearer vehicle the selflessness of dharmas receives only a very succinct treatment. As in the words of the master: If featurelessness is not realised, You taught there will be no liberation. And thus, in the Greater Vehicle You taught this exhaustively.28 We will digress no further. Those whose minds are not very disturbed should be able to gain recognition of the actual reality through this by themselves, and we therefore continue with the general explanation.
To bring the realisation of full buddhahood, The first which now is stressed is generosity. Among the ten named generosity, moral discipline, tolerance, diligence, meditative absorption, intelligence, skilful means, aspirations, powers and wisdom, for the bodhisattva on the Joyous ground it is the perfection of generosity which is mainly emphasised; but this does not mean that the others are absent. Generosity is the initial cause of omniscience.
And when they even give their own flesh graciously, From that one may infer what cannot be perceived. (1.9) Although the qualities of the bodhisattva may not now be apparent, their realisation and so forth may be readily inferred through observing their extraordinary willingness to give away both external and internal possessions, just as for instance fire is inferred from smoke.
Just as the generosity of bodhisattvas is the initial cause of buddhahood and an indication of qualities that are not apparent, it is also said to alleviate the suffering of ordinary beings, hearers and solitary buddhas, and be the cause for the attainment of lasting happiness. In order to express this, it was said that: All beings long for only happiness, But people will not be content when poor. And seeing that it is what fosters wealth The Sage would first teach generosity. (1.10) To the extent that remedies for hunger, thirst, sickness, cold and so forth alleviate suffering, they bring about worldly happiness. But as long as there is mistaken clinging to and concepts of a continuous identity, this is not a type of happiness free from distress, and one remains fully entangled within the world. Any happiness connected with this type of craving for happiness is by its very nature merely an alleviation of suffering, and it is the coveted resources that act as this suffering’s remedy; without such fundamentally mistaken resources it will not be experienced. Seeing how the objects that cause for the alleviation of suffering do not come about in the absence of an accumulation of merit connected with generosity, the Illustrious One, knowing perfectly the basic sentiment of every single being, gave the teachings on generosity as the very first, before all the teachings on moral discipline and so forth.
Even if the generous individual is now someone immoral, generosity has a significant impact on the success of their ventures. To express this: And even for the inconsiderate, The crude whose sole pursuit is their own ends, It’s giving which provides desired wealth And brings about relief from suffering. (1.11) Some, like merchants, approve of generosity, and will apply themselves assiduously to giving away very small amounts of wealth at the prospect of a substantial increase in revenue, but do not act in this way motivated by compassion, like the children of the sugatas who without any thought of reward do so as a furtherance of the joyous occasion of generosity. Still, although they disregard the faulty aspects of this generosity and pursue it merely for its advantages, it will lead to excellent and perfect prosperity, which again will remove the unpleasantness of physical sufferings such as hunger and thirst. It thus becomes a cause for alleviating suffering.
Also, those who lack compassion and are only concerned with alleviating their own suffering have a high regard for generosity. Thus it was stated that: It’s when one trains in generosity That one can swiftly meet with noble ones, Thus end the sequence of existences And reach the goal, the final state of peace. (1.12) As the saying goes, ‘Saints will keep close to generous donors.’ Thus, when those who are sincerely generous engage in acts of generosity, they will meet with noble beings and through their teachings come to see the futility of cyclic existence. Then, actualising the stainless noble path they eradicate ignorance of how to pacify suffering, terminate the continuous stream of samsaric birth and death that has been ongoing since beginningless time, and reach the transcendence of misery of the hearer and solitary buddha vehicles. In this way, on a temporary level, the generosity of non-bodhisattvas is a cause for the happiness of cyclic existence and transcendence.
For those committed to the benefit of all, The joy that giving grants will not be long delayed. It is not certain that non-bodhisattvas will enjoy the results of generosity just described simultaneous with the act of generosity, and it is therefore possible that they will not engage in generous acts because of not directly seeing the results of generosity. Bodhisattvas, however, will at very moment of engaging in generosity fulfil the desires of the beneficiary, and experiencing the sublime joy of their intended generous act coming to perfect fruition, experience the result of giving at that very instance. They therefore delight in acts of generosity at all times. Thus, as the explanation here has shown, generosity is for all, So both for tender-hearted and the callous ones the cause of the higher states and definite goodness. And therefore Advice on generosity is cardinal. (1.13)
Having such constant high regard for generosity, what is the sort of special joy that bodhisattvas experience when satisfying supplicants by distributing resources? To reply, it was said that: The joy the buddha heirs experience as they Are asked ‘Please give!’ and merely contemplate these words, Won’t even favour sages when they enter peace. No need to mention then the act of giving all! (1.14) When they hear supplicants saying, ‘Please give!’, the bodhisattvas will contemplate these words, and upon realising that, ‘They are asking me,’ a joy even more sublime than the joy of transcendence (nirvāṇa) surges forth. What need then to mention that which arises when they satisfy the supplicants by giving away both outer and inner things?
But when the bodhisattvas give away both outer and inner things as just mentioned, do they not feel any physical pain? It is explained that, just as when cutting inanimate things, it is impossible for supreme beings (mahātman) to feel any physical pain. As stated in the noble Absorption Requested by Gaganagañja: Take for example a great forest of sal-trees. If someone were to cut down one sal-tree, the remaining trees will not think, ‘That tree has been cut down, but we haven’t.’ They feel neither attachment nor anger. They have no thoughts or concepts. That is the kind of forbearance a bodhisattva has; a forbearance that is as immaculate as the sky.29 And from the Precious Garland: He has no physical suffering; How can he have mental suffering? Through compassion for the world’s pain He remains for a long time.30
However, those who have not attained a state beyond attachment will undoubtedly experience physical pain when anything adverse befalls them physically. To explain how this becomes a cause for them to apply themselves even more for the welfare of sentient beings, it was said: Their own experience when cutting off their flesh To offer it to others makes them recognise How those in hell and elsewhere suffer agony; They set about to swiftly bring this to an end. (1.15) The bodhisattva sees through their own experience of suffering how the extremely intense oppressive physical pains of those suffering the relentless horrors in states of hell, as animals, in the world of Yama and so forth, are unbearable sufferings thousands of times greater than the pain they feel when cutting their own body. Disregarding therefore the pain of their body being cut, they apply themselves immediately with enthusiasm to eliminate the suffering of sentient beings in hell and so forth.
To illustrate how, in terms of being a perfection, generosity thus described may be subdivided: To give without a giver, gift, recipient, Now this is a perfection that transcends the world. The word pāra31 means the further bank or shore of the ocean of cyclic existence, and refers to buddhahood which is by nature the abandonment of all afflictive and cognitive obscurations without exception. Pāramitā (‘perfection’) means that one has gone (itā) to the other shore (pāram), and since the qualification, ‘Elision does not take place before the second member of the compound,’ applies, the marker of the accusative case is not removed, and it takes its present form. Alternatively, since ‘pṛṣodara and so forth…’ applies, the ending is retained.32 When embraced by great intelligence (prajñā) it is explained to be special. Since generosity and the others are then similar to being perfected (pāramitā), they are perfections (pāramitā). When brought across (pāragamana) and firmly established through the special feature of dedication, it becomes a generosity receiving the name perfection. This explanation should be taken to apply to moral discipline and the others as well. This generosity referred to as a perfection, when free from the reference points of something given, a recipient and a giver, is a perfection transcending the world. That is what is taught in the Illustrious Lady Perfection of Intelligence.33 When non-referential it transcends the world. If still referential and bound by the truth of conventions, it is very much worldly. This is not something those who have not reached the stage of a bodhisattva are able to comprehend.
Otherwise, As long as there is still attachment to these three, We call it a perfection that remains mundane. (1.16) This is saying that if one relates to generosity through these three reference points, it is designated a mundane perfection.
At this point, to conclude what is called the ground under discussion by mentioning the excellent qualities of its particular insight, it was said: A joy now settles in the bodhisattva’s mind And gives this fine support a splendid radiance, A joy just like the moonstone which can banish all Oppressive darkness, making them victorious. (1.17) The word thus points to what has been explained above. Joy relates the ground’s name. Victorious (jina; syn. bodhisattva) refers to the state when one has overcome all opposition. This is the occasion when natural wisdom takes hold in the mind of the victor’s heir, and as such it is an exalted state. The supremely joyous ground removes all obscuring darkness, just as the foregoing explanation has shown; hence, it is victorious. The meaning of this is illustrated by way of example, when it was mentioned that it is just like the moonstone.34
‘Joyous’ is the first resolve from the Commentary to Entering the Middle Way. With this the explanation of the initial resolve of the bodhisattva is complete.
The Second Ground: Immaculate
Now, in terms of the second, it was said: Provided with pure traits of perfect discipline They shun misconduct’s blemish even when they dream, Since all forms of supreme understanding related to what we call ‘grounds’ are in nature one and the same, it is from the point of view of the qualities which would not arise in their absence, and the preeminent features of the perfection in question, such as moral discipline, that explanations of the special features of the second resolve and so forth are given. In the present context, moral discipline (śīla) is so called since, when one is not under the sway of the afflictions and misdeeds do not occur, this has a cooling effect (śīta) in the sense of quelling the fires that negatively affect the mind. Alternatively, being the very cause of happiness, it is the appropriate thing to rely on for holy beings.1 Its particular characteristic is the seven avoidances.2 The three dharmas – non-attachment, non-anger and having a correct view – are the motivating factors. As such, it is in terms of a moral discipline combined with these motivational factors that the tenfold path of conduct is taught. Perfect discipline refers to a preeminent form of moral discipline, and pure traits means the qualities are purified. Here, these are joined together in the phrase ‘pure traits of perfect discipline’. Since their qualities have been fully purified, their moral discipline is particularly exalted. And since the bodhisattva has that, even in the dream state he is not marred by the stains of faulty moral discipline.
How then is it that such perfect discipline leads to completely pure qualities? Concerning such bodhisattvas who have reached the second bodhisattva ground: And cultivate the tenfold path of righteous acts With ways immaculate in body, speech and mind. (2.1) As stated among other things in the context of the second bodhisattva ground: O victor heirs. Bodhisattvas dwelling on the bodhisattva ground Immaculate naturally abstain from killing. They avoid sticks and weapons. They avoid hostility. Filled with conscientiousness and compassion, their attitude towards all living beings is one of love and benevolence, wishing for their welfare and happiness. Even the mere thought of causing harm to sentient beings is absent, no need then to mention actually singling out a particular sentient being and deliberately inflicting serious physical harm to them. They abstain from taking what is not given, being content with their own possessions and filled with benevolence. They are careful with the possessions of others, and considering things owned by others as others’ property, have no intention to steal. Since they would not take even a blade of grass or a leaf, there’s no need then to mention taking actual necessities of life. They abstain from sexual misconduct, and being content with their own wife do not desire the wife of another. Seeing them to be another’s wife, or that it would be improper in terms of family relationship, signs or dharma, they do not entertain desirous thoughts towards women belonging to another – no need then to mention direct contact between the two sexual organs or unsuitable passageways.
They abstain from telling lies and are truthful, relate fact, speak in a timely fashion and act in accordance with what is said. As even in their dreams they do not tell lies to manipulate appearances, acceptance, wishes or ideas, there’s no need then to mention intentionally uttering them. They abstain from divisive speech and, being free from any animosity, do not cause dissension among sentient beings. They do not, in order to create discord, report there what they have heard here, or report here what they have heard there. They do not cause disunity among the harmonious, or increase it among the disharmonious. They do not delight in disharmony, do not enjoy disharmony, and will never utter words that create disharmony, irrespective of whether they are true or false. They abstain from harsh words, avoiding words that are upsetting, abusive, hurt others and expose others’ faults; that are uncivilised, directly or indirectly express vulgarities, are false and unpleasant on the ear; that are motivated by anger or rage, are disagreeable and upsetting, or cause others unease and sadness; and that are destructive to both one’s own and others mental state. Instead, they speak only words that are friendly, soft, delightful, undeceiving, pleasant on the ear, agreeable, civilised, delightful to many and agreeable to many, that spread joy, create satisfaction and are uplifting to both one’s own and others mental state.
They abstain from idle chatter, and give proper responses, speak in a timely fashion, talk about facts, talk about what is real, talk about dharma, speak logically, are disciplined in speech, are patient and speak timely and excellent words. As they even abstain from making any form of unsuitable jokes, there’s no need then to mention words that cause agitation. They have no covetousness, and do not desire the wealth, pleasures, enjoyments, or goods owned by others. They do not desire, wish for, or have any sense of longing for these things. They have no malice, and relate to sentient beings with a loving mind, a wish to help, a mind of compassion, a joyous and tender mind, wishing only to be of benefit to all beings. Avoiding aggression, resentment, enmity, grudges, malice and anything that leads to anger, every thought they have is one of love. They abstain from wrong views, hold correct views and follow the correct path. Avoiding the views of divination, various auspicious signs and faulty discipline,3 they uphold truthful and honest views involving no deception, and remain dedicated to the Buddha, the Dharma and the Sangha.4 Of these, the first three paths of virtuous action are practiced with the body, the middle four with speech, and the last three with mind. In this way they observe the tenfold path of virtuous conduct.
Is this path of conduct not then practiced by bodhisattvas of the initial resolve? They too do practice it, but: And it is in this tenfold virtuous path They now excel, becoming purer still. This is not the case for bodhisattvas with the initial resolve. Forever stainless, like the autumn moon, It beautifies them with a peaceful glow. (2.2) Peaceful refers to restrained faculties. Glow describes their radiant physical appearance.
Even having this type of completely pure discipline, Believing discipline to be by nature pure Will in itself deprive it of its purity. As stated in the Heap of Jewels Sutra: Kāśyapa. There are certain mendicants who uphold moral discipline, abiding strictly by the vows of personal liberation to the extent that they are fearful even of the most subtle transgression in relation to maintaining perfect ritual procedures and a proper environment. Having adopted this way, they follow the foundations of training becoming completely pure in body, speech and mind. But even though they maintain a completely pure way of life, they profess that there is a self. Kāśyapa. This is a mistaken form of moral discipline. It is the first type of feigned moral discipline. … Kāśyapa. There are also some mendicants who adopt the twelve ascetic practices,5 but with a reference point, maintaining their self-clinging and clinging to ownership. Kāśyapa. This is a mistaken form of moral discipline. It is the fourth type of feigned moral discipline.6 And thus they never harbour any concepts which Consider a distinction in the threefold sphere. (2.3) They are without a dualistic mind distinguishing entities and non-entities and so forth in relation to the three spheres: a sentient being in relation to which there is abstention, something abstained from and someone abstaining.
Having thus stated how it is that bodhisattvas possess perfect moral discipline, the following provides an explanation of how perfect moral discipline, maintained by others in general, is of much greater consequence than being generous and so forth, and that it is the very support for all perfect qualities. Although a person’s moral footing is corrupt, To give grants affluence though in the lower realms. Through generosity, benefactors who uphold moral discipline will find themselves in situations of perfect and lavish affluence among gods or humans. But if lacking the legs of moral discipline, they fall into the lower miserable states, born as ephemeral hell-beings; cows, horses, elephants, or monkeys; nāgas and so on; or deprived spirits with great magical powers and so on; enjoying various types of excellent prosperity in these states of existence. Therefore, But when the funds and profits have been fully spent, One can’t expect that there will be a future yield. (2.4) Someone may plant very few seeds but gain a great harvest, and to further the yield replant many more seeds. In this way they may in due time gain a great profit that can continuously increase. But those who are wasteful will foolishly spend the original seeds, and with that both the capital and potential profit is squandered. How will a truly excellent yield then ever be brought forth? Similarly, when lacking moral discipline, one ends up experiencing affluence in wretched states of being. With such utter foolishness it becomes impossible to continue enjoying prosperity, since one cannot stimulate what might yet come and is spending all that has already been gained.
Not only is it extremely difficult to gain a situation of perfect resources for someone bereft of the legs of discipline, it is also said to be extremely difficult for them to rise again once they have plunged into the lower miserable states. Thus, it was stated: If one is free and in an advantageous state But makes no further effort to remain therein, When falling into the abyss, all free will lost, How will one manage to escape these states again? (2.5) If at this point, when dwelling in the states of gods, humans and so forth, and being able to follow one’s own wishes without being reliant on another – like a mighty warrior dwelling in a conducive place free from bondage – one then makes no effort to uphold oneself, one will end up in the lower states – like a warrior captured and thrown into a deep ravine – how will one then ever emerge again? At that point, due to all the harm one causes, one is certain to continue traipsing through lower states of existence. It is taught that due to that, ‘Even if one is born among humans, two consequences will manifest.’7
Since a great many misdeeds accrue with such faulty discipline, And thus, as soon as generosity was taught, The Victor then went on to speak of discipline. The Victor, who conquered all negative dharmas, therefore gave the teachings on moral discipline directly following the teachings on generosity, in order that positive qualities connected with generosity and so forth not go to waste. Because, If in the field of discipline one’s qualities Can flourish, yields can be perpetually enjoyed. (2.6) Since it is the support for all positive qualities, moral discipline is itself a field. If qualities that come from generosity and so forth can flourish there, the continual and uninterrupted succession of causes and results will lead to a flourishing bounty of good results that one can enjoy for a long time; otherwise not.
Accordingly, For ordinary beings, those born from his words, Those who will self-awaken and the conqueror’s heirs, It’s discipline and nothing else that is the cause That brings about true excellence and higher states. (2.7) As stated: Treading these paths of ten non-virtuous actions to a greater degree is a cause for the states of hell; to a middling degree is a cause for the animal states; while to a lesser degree is a cause for the world of Yama. Killing leads to the hell states, leads to the animal states, leads to the world of Yama. And even if one is born among humans, two consequences manifest: one will have a short life and much disease. Taking what is not given leads to the hell states … (and so forth), one will be materially poor and have to share possessions. Sexual misconduct leads to the hell states … (and so forth), one will have an unreliable retinue and an unruly wife. Lying leads to the hell states … (and so forth), one will be denigrated and tricked by others. Slander leads to the hell states … (and so forth), one will have a disharmonious and cruel retinue. Harsh language leads to the hell states … (and so forth), one will hear unpleasant sounds and end up in quarrels. Idle chatter leads to the hell states … (and so forth), one’s words will not be accepted and one will lack eloquence. Covetousness leads to the hell states … (and so forth), one will lack satisfaction and have much desire. Malice leads to the hell states … (and so forth), one will not find help but be harmed by others. Wrong view leads to the hells states, leads to the animal states, leads to the world of Yama. And even if one is born among humans, two consequences manifest: one will be influenced by negative views and be deceptive.
These paths of ten non-virtuous actions thus result in the amassing of boundless stockpiles of suffering8 …, but by taking up the paths of the ten virtuous actions one will take rebirth amongst gods or humans, or even at the very peak of existence. On top of that, if these ten virtuous ways are cultivated with intelligence and a limited attitude, fear of the three realms, without great compassion, following what one has learnt from others and emulating their words, one will succeed in the hearer vehicle. Further, if without relying on others one can reach awakening for oneself, but lacks great compassion and skilful means, and is purified through fully understanding profound interdependence, one will succeed in the solitary buddha vehicle. Even more so, those who train with a truly vast and limitless broad mind, compassion and mastery in skilful means, have made vast aspiration prayers without ever abandoning any sentient being, and aim for the vast wisdom of buddhahood reach purity, will accomplish the utterly pure bodhisattva grounds and the vast utterly pure practices of the perfections.9 Thus, this is clearly indicating that unless one follows these paths of the ten virtuous actions – in conformity with the respective paths of ordinary beings, hearers, solitary buddhas or bodhisattvas – there is no other method for reaching the samsaric happiness of higher states or achieving the excellent goal, the authentic state of liberation naturally beyond both happiness and suffering.
Regarding these bodhisattvas of the second resolve: Like corpse and sea will not remain in company, Like luck and mishap are not seen to coexist, The eminent who are upholding discipline Will not with those of wayward conduct wish to mix. (2.8) Mishap is a synonym for misfortune.
To explain the distinctions in terms of perfections with respect to the above described moral discipline: When keeping discipline with notions of the three – Abstention with an agent, object and an act – It’s said to be perfection that is just mundane. If moral discipline is practiced with notions of these three, it is taught to be a mundane perfection. It’s supramundane when not entertaining these. (2.9) If this discipline is without the above mentioned three notions, it is taught to be a supramundane perfection.
By way of reiterating the qualities of the ground thus explained, the section on the perfection of moral discipline is concluded with the verse: The moon-born victor’s heir – the glory of this world While yet transcending it – completely free from stain; Immaculate, just like a soothing autumn moon Dispelling all the agonies in beings’ minds. (2.10) The word immaculate is used in the sense of being free from stains through the path of the ten virtues, and is the descriptive name of the second bodhisattva ground. Just as the stainless shimmer of the autumn moon clears away the agonies of beings, the immaculate moonlight of the victor’s heirs clears away the agonies created by faulty moral discipline. They cannot be included within cyclic existence, thus are transcending it, but are still the glory of this world, because they exhibit all perfect qualities and possess the cause for the splendour of a lord of the four continents.
This concludes the second resolve from the Commentary to Entering the Middle Way.
The Third Ground: Luminous
Now, in terms of the third resolve it was said that: A fire burning with the fuel of objects known Produces light; this third ground thus receives its name, The Luminous …, Luminous is the name of the third bodhisattva ground. Why is it the Luminous? This is a literal description. At this point, the fire of wisdom burns away the fuel of all knowable things without exception, producing a light that has the nature of pacification, and thus this ground is described as luminous. With the third resolve: … as here for the sugatas’ heir A copper-glow appears which is just like the sun. (3.1) Just like the sun at dawn glows like copper, for the bodhisattva there now appears a similar glow of wisdom.
In order to demonstrate the excellent perfection of tolerance of bodhisattvas who have gained such effulgent wisdom: If out of baseless fury someone were to come And sever from their body all their flesh and bone, To torture them, cut piece by piece and take their time, Towards their butcher tolerance will only grow. (3.2) Since bodhisattvas are heedful of the minds of others and have such wisdom, they will not physically, verbally or mentally express any misgivings related to injustices of the three times1 when encountering others’ malice, and the verse therefore specifies that, ‘If out of baseless fury…’. If such a sentient being were to cut flesh and bone from the bodhisattva’s body ounce by ounce, pausing and then starting again, over an extended period of time, not only would the bodhisattva not harbour any anger for such a butcher, but being aware that the individual by virtue of this evil act will have to endure the sufferings of hell and so forth, they develop an exceptional level of tolerance.
Furthermore, When bodhisattvas see that there exists no self, What’s cut, the cutter, time of cutting and the mode, Phenomena like these appear reflection-like, An insight through which they are able to forbear. (3.3) Not only are they exceptionally tolerant, seeing how these negative karmic acts serve as conditions for the perpetrator to experience the suffering of the hells and so forth, but since these phenomena are also seen to be like reflections, and since they are free from the concepts of self and mine, they have an extraordinary tolerance. The word also is used to include this among the causes of their tolerance.
Not only is tolerance a suitable way of practice for bodhisattvas, it is also for others the very cause of preserving any type of quality. Therefore, to indicate how it is also sensible for the intolerant to avoid anger: If you resent the one who’s caused you injury, Does your resentment take away the harm that’s done? To bear a grudge will serve no purpose here and now, And also brings adversity in lives to come. (3.4) Should an occasion arise for one to become upset and develop anger towards another for a harm inflicted, since this will not serve to reverse the harm done, it is pointless to harbour anger against them, as the act has already been done. Not only does resentment serve no purpose here, it also brings adversity in the next world, because harbouring enmity will lead to a furthering of unwanted consequences.
Some will, when experiencing the particular result of a negative act they themselves committed, entertain the deluded idea that, ‘This other individual is harming me,’ and become angry with the harm doer. In order to counteract the wish to seek revenge, and triumph over their harm: The karmic outcome of non-virtue in the past Is held to be the thing that brings it to an end. So why then keep on sowing seeds of suffering By angrily inflicting harm upon your foe? (3.5) When someone is overcome by enemies, suffering greatly as their body is subjected to the harm of sharp weapons, that is the concluding result of acts of killing performed in the past, and is a cause for avoiding experiencing terrifying resultant maturations as hell beings, in animal states, in the world of Yama and so forth, and every concurrent result of remaining afflictions that would result in repugnant physical appearances. Since it is actually like the final draught of medicine that cures an ailment once and for all, and the unpleasantness resulting from one’s fury and mistreatment of others has come to an end, why then further this by doing more harm, bringing upon oneself yet additional causes that will lead to their results? Therefore, it makes sense to relate to this resultant suffering with great tolerance, just as when a doctor uses a sharp instrument in order to cure a certain ailment.
Not only will intolerance as explained above cause a proliferation of unwanted maturing consequences, it will also eradicate stores of merit accumulated over a long period of time. To illustrate this it was said that: One’s anger for the victor’s heirs will instantly Destroy the virtue gained from generosity And discipline throughout a hundred aeons; thus No evil is there quite like one’s intolerance. (3.6) If a bodhisattva, a supreme being, were to give rise to even an instance of anger towards those who have made the resolve of awakening, and his reaction was triggered by afflictions – regardless of whether or not there was a sense of certainty about the extraordinary nature of the individual, and regardless of the justifiability of the perceived fault – that alone would destroy the stores of merit created by practicing the perfections of generosity and moral discipline, as previously taught, accumulated throughout a hundred aeons. No need then to mention a non-bodhisattva giving rise to that towards bodhisattvas. The consequences of such an act is just as impossible to ascertain as it is impossible to ascertain the weigh all the water in the great oceans using a scale. Therefore, since it leads to a proliferation of unwanted consequences and is harmful to one’s virtues, there is no evil greater than intolerance. And thus we find stated: Mañjuśrī. Enmity is called ‘enmity’ since it is the enemy that completely destroys virtues accumulated throughout a hundred aeons. That is why enmity is called ‘enmity’.2
Furthermore, of the intolerant, those who are not able to cause harm to others only bring destruction upon themselves, while those who are able but have no compassion, bring destruction upon both themselves and others. And when reborn, It fouls one’s features, steers one to unholy ones. Deprives one of the means to tell what’s right from wrong. And later, when having left this conducive state, Intolerance will send one straight to lower states.
If these are the faults of intolerance, what are then the qualities of tolerance, its opposite? The qualities of patience are their opposites. (3.7) Forbearance makes one beautiful, it grants esteem Among the holy, makes one morally adept; In future lives one will be human or divine, And every negativity will disappear. (3.8) It should be recognised that these qualities of tolerance are the opposite of the faults of intolerance that were mentioned.
Therefore, The common beings and the victor heirs who see The faults of enmity and patience’s qualities, Should shun intolerance and always try to have Forbearance, something that is praised by noble ones. (3.9) Enmity and tolerance refers to having enmity and showing tolerance, and faults and qualities refer to the related faults and qualities respectively.3 Here, the words have been combined in the line the faults and qualities of enmity and tolerance. By appreciating the faults of enmity here described, and their opposites which are the qualities of tolerance, one should strive to avoid intolerance, and at all times maintain only an attitude of tolerance.
Now, to show the divisions of tolerance as a perfection: Though dedicated for complete awakening, It’s still mundane if the three reference points remain. Even if fully dedicated to buddhahood, if there is a presence of the three parts – a tolerance, someone being tolerant and a sentient being towards whom one is tolerant – that tolerance is labeled a mundane perfection of tolerance. When free from these three references, the Buddha taught The same to be perfection that transcends the world. (3.10)
Just as the bodhisattvas of this ground gain a fully authentic perfection of tolerance, likewise: This ground is where the victor heirs now entertain Absorptions and the supernormal sense powers. Attachment, anger – these have been completely spent. They’re able to subdue mundane desirous love. (3.11) When absorptions (dhyāna) are mentioned, the word absorption is illustrative, and also refers to the equilibrium states (samāpatti) and the immeasurables (apramāṇa).
As stated in the context of the third bodhisattva ground: The bodhisattvas dwelling on the bodhisattva ground Luminous are separated from desires, are separated from negative non-virtuous ways, and by virtue of deliberation (vitarka) and judgement (vicāra) attain and abide in the first absorption of joy (prīti) and bliss (sukha), emerging from separation. With the cessation of deliberation and judgement, developing inner serenity, the mind becomes one-pointed and they attain and abide in the second absorption of joy and bliss, emerging from a concentration free from deliberation and judgement. With the cessation of desire for joy, dwelling in equanimity, being mindful and aware, there is physical bliss and they attain and abide in the third absorption beyond joy, expressed by the noble ones as the equanimity of dwelling in the bliss of whatever is thought of. Abandoning bliss, abandoning former suffering, comfort and discomfort disappears and they attain and abide in the fourth absorption of perfectly pure equanimity and awareness that is neither happiness nor suffering.4 These are the four meditative absorptions.
Concerning the four formless equilibria it states: Passing entirely beyond perceptions of form, perceptions of impediments disappear, they do not entertain perceptions of variety, and the thought ‘infinite space’ occurs, as they attain and abide in the sense field of infinite space. Passing entirely beyond the sense field of infinite space, the thought ‘infinite consciousness’ occurs, as they attain and abide in the sense field of infinite consciousness. Passing entirely beyond the sense field of infinite consciousness, the thought ‘nothing whatsoever’ occurs, as they attain and abide in the sense field of nothing whatsoever. Passing entirely beyond the sense field of nothing whatsoever, the thought ‘neither consciousness nor non-consciousness’ occurs, as they attain and abide in the sense field of neither consciousness nor non-consciousness.5 These are the four formless equilibria.
Concerning the four immeasurables it states: They attain and dwell in a broad mind possessed of love that is vast, non-dual, immeasurable and not hostile; that entertains no rivalry, and is without obscurations and malice; that is all-encompassing, extending throughout the expanse of phenomena (dharmadhātu), reaching to the limits of the element of space, spreading throughout the universe.6 The same as above applies to a broad mind possessed of compassion, joy and equanimity.
Concerning the five supercognitions it states: They enjoy various types of miraculous abilities. They can make the ground tremble; transform from one to many, and from many to one; appear and disappear; pass directly through walls; pass directly through barriers; even mountains they can pass through without impediment, as if they were empty space. They can move through space in the cross-legged posture, just like a winged bird. They can emerge from and sink into the ground as if it was water. They can move on water without sinking, as if it was solid ground. They can produce smoke or fire as if they themselves were a great bonfire. They can make great torrents of water emerge from their bodies as if they were a great cloud; and with that water they can quell the blazing fires that scorch, burn and incinerate the entire trichiliocosm. They can stretch out their hand and touch the most powerful and mighty moon and sun, and their physical powers reach even up to the world of Brahma.7 Such is their supercognition of miraculous ability.
Since the purified faculty of their divine ear surpasses the human state, they can hear the sounds of gods and humans alike. They can hear sounds however subtle or vast, far away or near, even those of gnats, mosquitos, bees and flies.8 Such is their supercognition of divine ear. They mentally, and with precision, gain knowledge of the minds of other sentient beings and people. They know desirous states of mind perfectly as desirous states of mind. They know non-desirous states of mind perfectly as non-desirous states of mind; and the same for those filled with anger and those without anger; those filled with confusion and those without confusion; those filled with afflictions and those without afflictions; the ones who are limited, vast, great or limitless; who are gathered, expanded, concentrated or not concentrated; who are liberated and who are not liberated; who have faults and are without faults. They know with precision the coarse-minded to be coarse-minded. They know with precision that those without coarse minds are not coarse-minded. In this way, they mentally and with precision gain knowledge of the minds of other sentient beings and people.9 Such is their supercognition of knowing the minds of others.
They can recall many previous states. They remember one lifetime. They remember two lifetimes, three, four, five, ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, a hundred, a thousand. They remember many hundreds of lifetimes, many thousands of lifetimes, many hundreds of thousands of lifetimes, many billions of lifetimes, many hundred quintillions of lifetimes; aeons of destruction, aeons of creation, many aeons of destruction and creation. They remember a hundred aeons. They remember a thousand aeons. They remember a hundred thousand aeons, ten million aeons, a billion aeons, ten billion aeons, a trillion aeons, up to ten quintillion aeons. They remember many previous states, their characteristics, evidence and reasons, thinking, ‘At one point I was named so-and-so, belonged to such-and-such a family, to this or that social class, ate such-and-such types of food, reached such-and-such an age, remained for this or that long, had such-and-such experiences of happiness and suffering, and when I died I took such-and-such a rebirth. Again, when I passed from that state, I was born here.’10 Such is their supercognition of recalling previous states.
With their pure divine eye surpassing human capacity, they see sentient beings dying and being born, of good character and negative character, those going to fortunate states and those going to unfortunate states, those who are good and those who are bad. They know with precision the type of karma sentient beings carry: ‘Indeed, these sentient beings engage in negative physical acts, negative verbal acts, negative mental acts. They have wrong views and disparage the noble ones. Having devoted themselves to karmas of wrong view, when their body perishes and they die, they will fall into lower states of misery and be born as hell beings.’ And: ‘Indeed, these sentient beings engage in good physical acts, good verbal acts and good mental acts. They have good views and do not disparage the noble ones. Having devoted themselves to karmas of good view, when their body perishes and they die, they will go to the higher states of happiness and be born among the gods.’ These things they know. Likewise, with their pure divine eye surpassing human capacity, they see sentient beings dying, being born, of good character and negative character … (and so forth), they see all this, their characteristics, evidence and reasons. They know with precision the type of karma sentient beings carry. Although they enter and emerge from these absorptions, liberations, concentrations and equilibria, if they see a situation where the limbs of awakening may be fulfilled, directing their attention towards that, they are born there by the power of their aspirations. Only then, not under the influence of such states, do they take rebirth there. Why? Because such bodhisattvas possess a stream of mind accomplished in skilful means.11 Hence, at this point the absorptions and supercognitions arise for the bodhisattva.
How then, are worldly attachment and aversion permanently and completely exhausted? The word and serves to include what is not explicitly mentioned, meaning that delusion is also completely exhausted. How so? About this the sutra states: As they realise that there is no transference and no destruction since all dharmas rely on conditions, all the bonds of desire are that much weakened; all the bonds of form, bonds of existence and bonds of ignorance are weakened. The bonds related to view have already been discarded. The bodhisattvas dwelling on the bodhisattva ground Luminous abandon the faults of attachment that would not decrease throughout many hundreds of aeons, many thousands of aeons, many hundred thousands of aeons, many ten millions of aeons, up to many ten quintillion aeons. They abandon the faults of aversion that would not decrease. They abandon faults of delusion that would not decrease.12 In this way, their attachment, aversion and delusion are wholly exhausted.
How is it that they are able to permanently destroy worldly desirous attachment? As stated: O victor heirs. This has been a short presentation of Luminous, the third bodhisattva ground. The bodhisattvas who dwell here mostly become kings of the gods and powerful lords of the gods13 . Refined and foremost when it comes to mastering the means of averting sentient beings’ desirous attachment, they are skilled in extracting beings from the mire of attachment.14 In this way, the victor heirs have the power to overcome the world’s desirous attachment.
Thus, having indicated how bodhisattvas on the third bodhisattva ground undoubtedly attain the pure perfection of tolerance, the absorptions, immeasurables, equilibria, supercognitions and the complete exhaustion of attachment and so forth, in order to clarify the particular support of the three perfections up to the perfection of tolerance, their nature as accumulations, and the attained result that is established, it was said: The Sugata would chiefly recommend these three, Of giving and so forth, to lay practitioners. And as they are the merit-type of gathering, They bring about the buddha in corporeal form. (3.12) Although only bodhisattvas may serve as the support for the generosity and so forth explained here, there is still mention of a twofold division in terms of householders and renunciates. In this regard, the three dharmas of generosity and so forth, being easier to practice, are mainly for householders, while diligence, meditative absorption and great intelligence are for renunciates. Still, it is not the case that one is impossible for the other. The accumulations that lead to buddhahood are two: the accumulation of merit and the accumulation of wisdom. The accumulation of merit is comprised of these three perfections, while the accumulation of wisdom is comprised of meditative absorption and great intelligence. Diligence is held to be the cause for both. The accumulation of merit is the cause for the form body of an illustrious complete buddha, the variegated marvellous and unimaginable form with hundreds of meritorious characteristics. The cause of the body having the nature of dharma, and characterised by being unborn, is the accumulation of wisdom.
Now, having expressed its greatness in terms of the exaltedness of the support and so forth, to provide a conclusion to the section on the third bodhisattva ground: On Luminous, where bodhisattvas stay like suns, The murkiness within themselves has been dispelled. They now intend to shed all beings of their gloom. The Luminous15 ground is the sun-like state of the sugata heirs, where the unknowing present in their own being, which constituted an obstacle to the arising of this state, has been dispelled. Acting as examples, they now wish to destroy the gloom that blocks the arising of the third ground for others as well. For these bodhisattvas, But though intense upon this ground, no anger stirs. (3.13) Although they are as intense16 as the sun when it comes to defeating the gloom of faults that destroy one’s qualities, they never become angry with individuals filled with defects, the reasons being their excellent cultivation of tolerance and a mind saturated with compassion.
This concludes the third resolve from the Commentary to Entering the Middle Way.
The Fourth Ground: Radiant
Now, by way of showing how the perfection of diligence surpasses the perfections of generosity, moral discipline and tolerance, the fourth resolve is explained: Good qualities come in the wake of diligence; What brings one stores of merit and intelligence. As this is where their diligence is burning strong, This ground, the fourth among them, is the Radiant. (4.1) If one has no enthusiasm for virtuous ways, one will not apply oneself in all manners to generosity and so forth, thus making it impossible for all the good qualities to arise. With a formerly established keenness for accumulating good qualities, what has been gained will increase and what has not been gained becomes achievable. Thus, diligence is the cause of each and every good quality. That it is the cause of the two accumulations was already explained above. Being the ground where diligence blazes forth as it refines all one’s good qualities, this fourth bodhisattva ground is therefore named Radiant (arciṣmatī).
Inquiring further into why it is called ‘Radiant’, the purpose for using this name is now explained: There now appears for the sugata heirs a light More bright than copper, born from cultivation of The thirty-seven factors of enlightenment – On this ground there appears for the bodhisattvas a glow exceeding the lustre of copper previously explained, and this comes from their practice of the thirty-seven factors of awakening. Thus, since the fire of genuine wisdom blazes brightly, this bodhisattva ground is named Radiant. The thirty-seven factors of awakening are the four applications of mindfulness, the four correct abandonments, the four miraculous legs, the five faculties, the five powers, the seven limbs of awakening and the eightfold noble path.
The four applications of mindfulness are taught at length: O victor heirs. The bodhisattva dwelling on the bodhisattva ground Radiant is assiduous, attentively and mindfully remaining with the observation of the inner body, abandoning craving and discomfort relating to the world. He is assiduous, attentively and mindfully remaining with the observation of the outer body, abandoning craving and discomfort relating to the world. … remaining with the observation of the inner and outer body … (and so forth, as before). Likewise, he is assiduous, attentively and mindfully remaining with … inner sensations, outer sensations, and inner and outer sensations; (and, as before) … with inner thinking, outer thinking, and inner and outer thinking; … remaining with inner dharmas, outer dharmas, and inner and outer dharmas.1
Concerning the four correct abandonments it is taught: He sets himself a goal, strives, is diligent, focuses his mind and directs it properly in order not to give rise to negative non-virtuous dharmas that have not yet arisen. Likewise, he … in order to rid himself of negative non-virtuous dharmas that have arisen. Likewise, he … in order to give rise to virtuous dharmas that have not yet arisen. Likewise, he sets himself a goal, strives … in order to stabilise, keep from diminishing, increase, ensure the future arising and complete perfection of virtuous dharmas that have arisen.2 Concerning the four miraculous legs it is taught: He cultivates the miraculous leg of the concentration of interest, combined with the impulse of abandonment, through relying on isolation, relying on freedom from attachment, relying on extinction and developing renunciation. Likewise, … the miraculous leg of the concentration of diligence, combined with the impulse of abandonment, … ; … the miraculous leg of intention, combined with the impulse of abandonment, … ; … the miraculous leg of investigation, combined with the impulse of abandonment, … .3
Concerning the five faculties it is taught: He cultivates the faculty of faith, relying on isolation … the faculty of diligence … the faculty of mindfulness … the faculty of concentration … the faculty of intelligence, relying on isolation, relying on freedom from attachment … (and so forth, as before).4 The five powers are exactly the same as those when the disharmonious elements have been overcome. Concerning the seven limbs of awakening it is taught: He cultivates the limb of true awakening that is mindfulness, relying on isolation … the limb of true awakening that is investigation of dharmas … the limb of true awakening that is diligence … the limb of true awakening that is joy … the limb of true awakening that is pliancy … the limb of true awakening that is concentration … the limb of true awakening that is equanimity, relying on isolation … (and so forth, as before).5
Concerning the eightfold noble path it is taught: He cultivates correct view, relying on isolation, relying on freedom from attachment, relying on extinction and developing renunciation. He cultivates correct thought … correct speech … correct action … correct livelihood … correct exertion … correct mindfulness … correct concentration, relying on isolation … (and so forth, as before).6
Not only do they on this ground gain a cultivation of the factors of awakening: And any sense of self is now entirely gone. (4.2) On this ground their view of self is also removed. As stated: O victor heirs. The bodhisattva dwelling on the bodhisattva ground Radiant is free from all things related to the identity view: he is freed from all sense of stimulation, conceptualisation, analysis, sense of permanence, sense of ownership, sense of wealth and sense of abiding arising through attachment to a self, sentient beings, life, maintenance, a person, an individual, aggregates, elements and sense fields.7
This concludes the fourth resolve from the Commentary to Entering the Middle Way.
The Fifth Ground: Hard to Conquer
Now, in terms of the fifth resolve: Great beings on this ground so Hard to Overcome Cannot be conquered even by the demon hordes. The Bodhisattvas dwelling on the fifth bodhisattva ground cannot be overcome even by the divine child-demons (devaputramāra) dwelling in all the realms of the world, let alone all other demons subservient to them. That is why this ground receives the name Hard to Conquer.
It should be recognised of the bodhisattvas that: With excellent absorption these high-minded ones Are masters in the subtle nature of the truths. (5.1) Now, from among the ten perfections, it is the perfection of meditative absorption which is foremost. High-minded ones (sumati) is a reference to noble beings (ārya). Their truths are the truths of the high-minded, meaning the noble truths. Nature (svabhāva) refers to its true condition (svarūpa). The nature that is comprehended through exact understanding is the exact nature, and those who have a subtle understanding of the true condition of the truths of the high-minded are supremely wise. The four noble truths referred to here are those of suffering, origin, cessation and path.
But the Illustrious One taught that there are only two truths, namely the relative truth and the ultimate truth. As stated: The knowers of the world themselves declared, And not by hearsay, that there are two truths: The relative and the ultimate. There is no such thing as a third truth.1 And from the Middle Way Treatise: The dharma teachings of the buddhas Are based on two truths: The relative truth of the world And the ultimate truth.2 Why then, it may be asked, do we have these four noble truths as distinct from the two truths? To explain we would say that, although that is indeed so, it is in order to separately indicate the causal and resultant aspects of what to adopt and what to reject that the four noble truths have been related in this manner. The aspect that needs to be rejected is thorough affliction (saṃkleśa), its result being the truth of suffering and its cause the truth of origin. The aspect that needs to be adopted is complete purification, its result being the truth of cessation and the cause for attaining this being the truth of the path. Among these, the truth of suffering, origin and path are included within the relative truth, while the truth of cessation is the essential condition of the ultimate truth. Any other truths, whatever they may be, would likewise certainly also be included within these two truths.
Are there then other truths different from the four truths? Yes, there are. As stated in the context of the fifth bodhisattva ground: They know with complete accuracy that, ‘This is the noble truth of suffering’. They know with complete accuracy that, ‘This is the noble truth of the origin of suffering, the cessation of suffering, and the path leading to the cessation of suffering.’ They are well-versed in the relative truth, well-versed in the ultimate truth, well-versed in the truth of characteristics, well-versed in the truth of distinctions, well-versed in the truth of examination, well-versed in the truth of substance, well-versed in the truth of production, well-versed in the truth of knowing extinction and non-arising, well-versed in the truth of engaging with the knowledge of the path, and well-versed in the truth of mastering the progression through all the levels of the bodhisattva grounds culminating in the wisdom of a tathāgata.
Related to these, accurately satisfying the wishes of other sentient beings, they fully know the relative truth. Applying themselves accurately to the sole path, they fully know the ultimate truth. Having realised their own and the shared characteristics, they fully know the truth of characteristics. Having understood the principles of distinguishing dharmas, they fully know the truth of distinctions. Having experienced what harms body and mind, they fully know substances. Having realised the connections involved in migrating, they fully know rebirth. Having fully pacified all the torments of illness, they fully know extinction and non-arising. Having mastered non-duality, they fully know how to engage with the knowledge of the path. Having perfectly assimilated the knowledge of all aspects, they fully know the truth of achieving the connections up through all the levels of the bodhisattva grounds culminating in the wisdom of a tathāgata.3
This concludes the fifth resolve from the Commentary to Entering the Middle Way.
The Sixth Ground: Present
Now, concerning the sixth resolve, it was explained: On Presence, with their minds now placed in equipoise, They’re in the presence of the traits of buddhahood. Dependent rising is the fact they now perceive – And reach cessation, resting in intelligence. (6.1) Having genuinely actualised the perfection of meditative absorption on the fifth bodhisattva ground, on the sixth ground the bodhisattvas place the mind in equipoise and see the reality of profound interdependence. Through genuine actualisation of the perfection of intelligence (prajñā) they now achieve cessation, unlike before. Lacking superior intelligence they were previously unable to reach this cessation through the genuine perfections of generosity and so on. Fully understanding the true nature of reflection-like things, the bodhisattvas have focussed on the truth of the path on the five bodhisattva grounds, and are now in the presence (abhimukha) of the traits of buddhahood. Therefore this ground is called Presence (abhimukhī).1
To explain how all other stores of qualities depend on the perfection of great intelligence, it was said: A single sighted person may with ease escort The blind in scores wherever they should need to go. And likewise, for these virtues that possess no sight, It’s insight that can shepherd them to victorhood. (6.2) Just one sighted person with ease can lead great multitudes of blind people to their destination, when the other perfections are led by the perfection of great intelligence, they will reach the ground of the sugatas, Universal Illumination (samantaprabhā), because of its ability to discern correct and incorrect paths.
Some may inquire, when it was said here that, ‘… dependent rising is the fact they now perceive, and reach cessation, resting in intelligence,’ how it is that bodhisattvas upon seeing the dependent origination of dharmas come to see the actual reality of interdependence. To this we reply that the real essence of this is not something we can access as long as our mind’s eye is completely veiled by the thick cataracts of ignorance. But it is accessible to the bodhisattvas dwelling on the higher levels, the sixth and so forth, and therefore should not be inquired of us, but rather addressed to the stainless bodhisattvas and illustrious buddhas whose eyes are free from the blurring cataracts of ignorance, as they have applied the ointment that overcomes the blurring cataracts of ignorance and allows one to see emptiness unmistakably.
One may then ask: ‘Are not statements of how bodhisattvas, practicing the perfection of great intelligence, and thus seeing the reality of interdependent origination, recounted in such sutras as the noble Perfection of Intelligence (prajñāpāramitā) and the noble Ten Grounds (daśabhūmika)? Would it not then suffice to explain by quoting from such scriptures?’ This will also not do, because it is hard to ascertain their intent. One such as myself is not able to teach the actual reality from scriptures, or based on my own independent judgement explain what is stated there. But, by utilising treatises written by trustworthy individuals containing their infallible explanations, the intent of the scriptures may be ascertained: As he was one who reached the deepest dharmic truths Relying on the scriptures and through reasoning, By following the system of Nāgārjuna, As found within his works, I shall proceed to speak. (6.3) Just like a bodhisattva practicing the perfection of great intelligence sees the nature of dharmas just as it is, the noble Nāgārjuna had an unmistaken understanding of the scriptures, and through the reasoning and scriptural citations in his Middle Way Treatise he explained in lucid detail how all dharmas are in actuality without any intrinsic nature (niḥsvabhāva). Thus, just as the noble Nāgārjuna explained the actual reality of all dharmas using reasoning and scripture, what I shall now say will be in accord with his manner of instruction.
‘But how,’ some might say, ‘can we be sure that Nāgārjuna unmistakenly ascertained the scriptures?’ This can be gathered from the scriptures. As stated in the noble Descent Onto Langka: In the south, in the land of Veta, A mendicant renowned as Śrīmat, Referred to by the name ‘Nāga’, Crushing the views of existence and non-existence, Will teach my vehicle in the world, The unsurpassed Greater Vehicle, And accomplishing the Joyous Ground, He will venture to Sukhavatī.2 And from the noble Great Cloud Twelve Thousand Lines: Ānanda. Four hundred years after I have passed into transcendence, this young Licchavi named Sarvasattva Priyadarśana3 will become a bhikṣu named Nāga and spread my teachings widely; and eventually, in the world realm called Pure Illumination (prasādābhā), he will become a tathāgata, arhat, true and complete buddha by the name Jñānākaraprabhā.4 Hence, he unmistakenly ascertained the scriptures.
The treatises which contain the complete teachings of interdependent origination exactly as it is, should only be taught to those who have the seed of emptiness within their being from prior acquaintance, not to others. This is because when they hear about emptiness, some may develop mistaken ideas which can lead to very unfortunate results. They may give rise to the perverted conviction that emptiness means ‘non-existence’, and end up entertaining and perpetuating mistaken views of denying all entities. The teacher must therefore determine whether they have a good motivation before explaining the view of emptiness to the student.
It is difficult to determine, so how can one be certain that they are a suitable recipient for the teachings on emptiness and should be taught emptiness? One can reach certainty through external indications, and to describe what these signs are it was said: Some common people, when they hear of emptiness, Will find that great delight comes surging from within, A joy so fervent, filling up their eyes with tears, And causing every single hair to stand on end. (6.4) Such ones possess the seed of the awakened mind, Are vessels for the teachings on reality. They should … as they are qualified to receive teachings, … receive instructions on the ultimate truth,
If one teaches these kinds of students the actual reality, one’s efforts will not be fruitless. Why is that? Since, As they will see related qualities emerge. (6.5) Not only will these students not give rise to any negative perverted ideas about emptiness, they will also gain the qualities that come from learning the view of emptiness. How so? They will relate to learning about the view of emptiness like finding a treasure, and in order that it may not be lost: A person who will always live by discipline, Who gives in generosity and cultivates Compassion, trains in tolerance, and dedicates His virtue to awakening for beings’ sake; (6.6) Who for the bodhisattvas shows sincere respect, They understand that, ‘If I transgress the moral discipline I will fall into lower realms and the view of emptiness will be interrupted,’ and thus will continuously and correctly uphold moral discipline. With the thought, ‘Even though I will be born in the higher realms through keeping moral discipline, if I am poor I will have to work very hard to get the basic necessities such as food, medicine and dharma robes, and the view of emptiness will be interrupted,’ they give generously. Thinking, ‘It is when the view of emptiness is encompassed by compassion that it will lead to buddhahood, and not otherwise,’ they cultivate compassion. With the thought, ‘Anger leads to the lower states and gives one a poor complexion, which will displease the noble ones,’ they train in tolerance. Since there will not be an immeasurable and uninterrupted causal and resultant link for the attainment of buddhahood if the practices of moral discipline and so forth have not been dedicated towards the state of omniscience, they dedicate these roots of virtue to awakening for the sake of liberating beings. And thinking, ‘Apart from bodhisattvas nobody else is able to genuinely teach the nature of interdependent origination,’ they have respect for the perfect bodhisattvas.
In this way they will without doubt accumulate an uninterrupted store of virtue for a long time, and then: And is insightful in the ways profound and vast; In due course such a person gains the Joyous ground. If this is your objective, hearken to this path. (6.7) The last line is saying that, ‘If the Joyous ground is your objective, then ….’ This indicates what is about to be explained.
A quote from the scriptures will serve to illustrate the genuine state of all dharmas. The noble Ten Grounds states: O victor heirs. The bodhisattvas who have fully completed the path on the fifth bodhisattva ground, enter the sixth bodhisattva ground engaging with the ten equalities of dharmas. Which ten? They are all dharmas’ equality as featureless; all dharmas’ equality as without characteristics; and in the same way their equality in being without arising, unproduced, detached, pure from the outset, unelaborate, without adoption and without rejection; all dharmas’ equality in being like illusions, dreams, optical distortions, echoes, a moon in the water, reflections and apparitions; and all dharmas’ equality in the non-duality of things and non-things. When they realise the nature of all dharmas to be in this way, through their acumen and resultant tolerance they attain the sixth bodhisattva ground, Presence.5
Thus, here only the reasoning of the equality of dharmas in being without production6 is explained. The intention being that, by virtue of that, the other types of equality will be easily understood. As master Nāgārjuna sets forth in the beginning of the Middle Way Treatise: Not from self, not from other, Not from both, nor without a cause Are entities ever produced At any point as anything.7 Ever (jātu) means at any time. The term at any point (kecana) is a locative relative pronoun (‘support’-word) and synonym for somewhere (kvacid), and can indicate location, time, or tenet-system. The word anything is a relative pronoun (‘supported’-word) expressing outer or inner entities. Thus, one could here elaborate the sentence and say, ‘Outer and inner entities are not produced from self with respect to any place, time or tenet-system.’ Here, when it says not (na), this relates to production from self as an argument for existence, and not to being existent, since the refutation of that is implicit. This should likewise be applied to the other three assertions. Having thus reiterated this fourfold thesis, in order to prove it through reasoning, it was stated: It can’t come from itself, and how from other things? Can’t come from both, how could it be without a cause? The sense of the statement, ‘Not produced from self …’ is as is stated here: ‘It can’t come from self ….’ The remaining statements should be similarly linked.
How can we be certain of this? As: If it came from itself there would be nothing gained. What is produced, produced once more – that makes no sense. (6.8) It refers to the production, the actor in the act of production, meaning the sprout. From itself means that the production comes from its very own self-identity. Thus, the assertion here is that the sprout’s own identity cannot produce that very sprout’s identity. Why? If that very identity already gained was to come from the same existing identity of that itself, there would be no additional quality achieved at all, since it was existent already.8
To explain how the position of self-production conflicts with reason, it was said, ‘What is produced, produced once more – that makes no sense.’ Immediately following this assertion, logical reasoning is supplied: To think that what’s produced is then produced again Would mean that sprouts and such could never be procured. If one claims that seeds already produced are reproduced, does that imply that its production must stop for the sprout to be produced? What is there to prevent it being produced yet again? The consequence would be that sprouts, stalks, buds and so on would never be produced. Furthermore, The seed would be produced until the end of time – … for the very reason already given. If one then thinks, ‘When the conducive conditions such as water, time and so on, are present for the production of a sprout, the seed will transform and the sprout be produced; and since the presence of that agent, the sprout, opposes it, the seed will then be destroyed. Therefore, the mentioned faults do not apply here. And since the seed and the sprout are not really different, it is not the case that it is not produced from self.’ This is untenable, because How could what will destroy it ever come to be? (6.9) Since seed and sprout are not really different, it is illogical that the sprout could destroy it – they are thought to be ‘alike in own identity’.
Furthermore, A sprout distinct in shape, hue, taste, strength, ripening, And different from its cause, could not exist for you. Shape refers to being long, round and so on; colour to yellow and so on; taste to sweetness and so on; and potential refers to special powers or particular abilities, such as being a remedy for haemorrhoids which makes haemorrhoids disappear when applied to the body, or the oṣadhi-herb which enables one to travel in the sky by merely holding it. Maturation refers to a substance’s special feature acquired as it transforms, such as the pepper-plant (pippalī) becoming sweet. If the seed and the sprout are indeed indistinct, that which is the identity of seed should likewise be observed without difference as the shape and so forth of the sprout. Since this is not observed, just as seeds from for example garlic, are different from sprouts of for example plantain trees, it is untenable that they are not different.
One may think that, ‘Since it abandons the seed-phase and attains another phase, the seed can turn into a sprout.’ In that case: Its former likeness left behind as it adopts Another form, what’s left of its identity? (6.10) Its entity means the thing itself and not something other. But since with this way of thinking the non-otherness of the sprout would be an impossibility, its non-otherness is impaired. They may think that, ‘Although the shape and so forth of the seed and sprout are different, the substance is the same.’ But that cannot be so. If one does not perceive their shape and so forth, one cannot perceive their substance.
Furthermore, And if, for you, the seed and sprout are indistinct, The so-called sprout should like the seed not be observed. Or, since they are the very same, just as the sprout They both should then be seen – thus do not make such claims. (6.11) When the sprout is present the identity of seed cannot be perceived with its own essence, and likewise since it is not distinct from the seed the identity of sprout should just like the identity of seed not be perceived. Alternatively, when the sprout is perceived, being of the very identity of the sprout the seed should likewise be perceived, since it is not anything other than sprout and so forth. Wanting to avoid the faults of these consequences, one should not assert that the seed and the sprout are indistinct.
Having thus refuted production from self imputed in other traditions claiming to understand reality, in order to shown how these ideas are not even tenable when considered in terms of the conventions of worldly people not trained in other traditions, it is said: It’s when the cause has ceased that its result is seen, And thus that they’re the same is not the worldly view. Since it is when the causal seed has disappeared that the resultant sprout is seen, even worldly people do not see seed and sprout as indistinct. If they were the same, then just like the cause one should not be able to see the result, but it is seen. Therefore, it is not the case that they are indistinct.
Since production from self is in conflict with reason for both sides: So, neither in reality nor in the world Is this imagined self-production reasonable. (6.12) For this reason, the master did not make any distinctions, but refuted production overall when saying, ‘Not from self….’ Some say that, ‘Entities are ultimately not produced from self since they exist, like a sentient being,’ but making such a distinction by adding ultimately should be considered utterly meaningless.
Furthermore, If one accepts self-rising, maker and the made, As well as act and actor, these would be the same. They’re not, so self-arising I cannot accept – The faults entailed have been elaborately explained. (6.13) As stated: It would never make sense That cause and result are identical. If cause and result were identical, The produced and the producer would be the same.9 They cannot be identical, since it would follow that father and son, or the eye and consciousness, would be identical. And thus it was stated: If the wood were the fire, Doer and act would be the same.10 Thus, fearing these and other unwanted consequences, and wishing to reach an unmistaken realisation of the two truths, one should not hold that things can be produced from self.
‘That entities do not arise from themselves is certainly the case. This position is indeed reasonable. But the words how could it arise from other? do not make sense. Based on the scriptures which state, “The four external conditions are: the causal, the object, the immediately preceding and the dominant; conditions are the creators of entities,” although undesirable, production from other must be upheld.’ Some say: ‘The causal conditions are five excepting the enabling cause. The object condition is any dharma suitable to be an object of the six consciousnesses perceived as an object. The immediately preceding condition is the mind and mental states other than the mind which has entered transcendence without remaining aggregates. The dominant condition is the enabling cause.’ 11 Others say: ‘From the definition which states, “The cause is what accomplishes,” its causal condition is that which is something’s producer, constituting a seed; while the object condition is the object that causes production, similar to a supporting cane, of the causally arisen mind and mental factors, similar to the old person getting up, which is the sense of the statement, “It is the support of the generated dharmas.” That which is like an immediately preceding condition is that as soon as the cause has ceased the condition is there for the production of the result, just as a sprout immediately succeeds the disappearance of the seed. The dominant condition is that which by its presence makes something arise.12 ‘Any other conditions, such as the simultaneously produced or subsequently produced, are included within these. Since an almighty god (īśvara) and so on are not conditions, it is ascertained that “There is no fifth condition.”’13
This cannot be upheld, since it contradicts reasoning and scripture. To explain this in terms of reasoning: If something different could give rise to something else, Then utter darkness should emerge from tongues of flame. This is neither observed nor logical, and thus not the case. Hence, it is stated: That cause and result are different Would never be tenable. If cause and result were different, A cause and a non-cause would be identical.14 Furthermore: And anything could be produced from everything, … as any cause and non-cause could lead to the production of any result and non-result. Why is that? Since in their difference all non-makers are the same. (6.14) The productive rice seed is just as different from its resultant rice sprout as non-productive fire, charcoal, barley seeds and so on are; and just as the rice sprout is produced from the rice seed that is other, the same could then happen from fire, charcoal, barley seeds and so forth. Also, just as a separate rice sprout arises from a rice seed, so should a pot, a piece of cloth and so forth. This however is not what we see. Hence, this cannot be the case.
To this they reply, ‘Although the cause and effect are indeed different, a consequence of this is not that everything may arise from everything, since one may observe that there is a specific order (niyata) to things. This specific order is such that, ‘What has potential to be made defines result. What can produce it is the cause, though something else. In one continuum, from makers, things arise, And rice sprouts won’t therefore produce barley and such.’ (6.15) Here, result has a kṛtya-affix15 indicating the sense of potential. ‘That which has the potential to be produced by something is its result, while that which can produce that result, although it is other, is the cause. Therefore, it is only through a specific sense of otherness that entities are related as cause and result, and not a general type of otherness. They are of one continuum, and the producer yields produced – it is not the case that it belongs to a separate continuum, such as for instance a barley seed, nor that it belongs to the same continuum but is not the producer, as is the case for a former instance that cannot come after a latter instance – and therefore it does not follow that everything can arise from everything.’ This too is inadequate. What is it that makes for this specific order? Where does this come from when saying that, ‘The cause of the rice sprout is only the rice seed and nothing other, and the result of the rice seed is only the rice sprout and nothing other’? This is the question that may be asked of those who claim cause and result. If they say, ‘Because we observe a specific order,’ and when further questioned they reply, ‘A specific order is observed,’ that is non-sensical; because by just saying that, ‘Because of observing a specific order, a specific order is observed,’ they provide no reason for the specific order and are not able to even slightly avoid the faults that have been stated.
Furthermore, to illustrate that the general agreement that there is no separation between common and specific otherness disproves this exact claim, it was said: Take species such as barley, ironwood or dhak: These can’t produce a rice-sprout, lack that potency, Don’t share continuum, lack similarity. With otherness, a rice seed too lacks in these ways. (6.16) Just as barley, ironwood16 , dhak tree17 and so forth are other, and are therefore not held to be producers of the rice sprout, and do not have the ability to produce a rice sprout, are not part of the same continuum and have no likeness, the rice seed as well is not special in any of the particular ways just mentioned, because it is just something other. Hence, in this context the refutation is done by reiterating as if established, the otherness that others accept to be established.
Now, to explain how cause and result cannot possibly be different: The sprout is never there the same time as the seed, So how can seed be other without otherness? Thus since one cannot prove that seeds give rise to sprouts, Give up this view that things arise from something else. (6.17) One can only see a difference between Maitreya and Upagupta based on their correlation, but seed and sprout are not simultaneous objects like that, since without the seed transforming there will be no sprout. Because there is no existence of sprout at the same time as the seed is present, the seed has no otherness in relation to the sprout. And in the absence of otherness one cannot say that, ‘The sprout is produced from something other.’ Therefore, abandon this position of production from other.
The meaning of this is as explained: The nature of existents Is not in their conditions and the like. If there is no self-existence, How can there be other-existence?18 Here, conditions and the like may be causes or conditions, the gathering of causes and conditions, or something different. If their nature does not transform, the nature of results will not exist, since these will not have been produced. When they are non-existent, there can be no sense of difference in relation to the conditions and so forth. The seventh case implies, ‘The existence of which indicates existence.’ In terms of location, the nature of results do not exist in the conditions and so forth, like a vessel and a juniper tree. When something does not exist in something, it cannot be produced from that, like the example of sand and sesame oil. As stated: If it is non-existent And arises from those conditions, Then why can it not arise Also from non-conditions?19 Thus, this position of support does not hold true when scrutinised in light of this verse of the master.
‘When you here say, “the sprout cannot exist as the same time as the seed,” this is not reasonable: just as one can see the pans of a balance scale ascending and descending at the same time, the sprout is produced as the seed is being destroyed. Thus, at exactly the same time as the seed is destroyed the sprout is produced, and therefore the destruction of the seed and the production of the sprout are simultaneous, and the seed and sprout are present at the same time. Hence, there is otherness.’ To present this, they say: ‘As when you see the levers of a balance scale Ascending and descending simultaneously; Just so producers cease as what’s produced appears.’ ‘Hence,’ they claim, ‘we are not at fault.’
If it was like that: If coinciding, yes – they don’t, so this can’t be. (6.18) It is unsuitable to think of the arising and destruction of produced and producer as simultaneous as in the example of a balance scale. Why? Even though the ascending and descending are simultaneous in the example of the scale, there is no such simultaneity in the actual case that example is being linked to, thus it does not make sense.
To indicate why it is not so, it was said: While made it faces its production, isn’t yet. While ceasing it still is, but tends towards its end. So how can this be similar to a balance scale? When we say being produced, it is approaching production and is therefore in the future, and when saying ceasing, it is approaching cessation and is present now. Thus, one is not existent since it has not been produced but will be produced, while one is existent now and can therefore cease. How can this instance be similar to a balance scale? Since the two pans of a balance scale both are in the present, the acts of ascending and descending are simultaneous, but as the seed is in the present and the sprout in the future they are not simultaneous, so this is not similar to a balance scale.
One might then think, ‘Even though they are not simultaneous, there is still simultaneity with respect to the processes.’ But this too is unacceptable, since you would not accept that there is a separation between phenomena and their processes. So, furthermore, Arising with no subject doesn’t make much sense. (6.19) Since the sprout, the subject in the process of production, is in the future, it does not exist. Without the existence of that, the unsupported cannot exist; how can that which does not exist be simultaneous with the cessation? Hence, it is certainly illogical that the processes can be simultaneous. As stated: If an unproduced entity existed somewhere, It could be under production. But such an entity being nonexistent, How can there be production?20 This means that, if the unproduced entity we call ‘sprout’ were to exist somewhere before being produced, it could be said to have production, but one cannot establish this in any way prior to the actual production, because it has as yet not been produced. Hence, since the entity that supports the process of production does not exist before its production, it cannot be endowed with it; so, ‘How is there production?’ Since the word that (tasmin) is referring to the entity (bhāve), they are in case-agreement; entity (bhāve) is in the seventh case, and nonexistent (asati) is a further specification of the entity. The word how (kim) is to be joined with be produced (utpadyate). Hence, the meaning becomes, ‘When that entity is a nonexistent, how can there be production? Not even the slightest thing is being produced.’
If one then asks: ‘But isn’t the example of the balance scale presented in the noble Rice Seedling Sutra, where it says, “In the way that the arms of a pair of scales ascend and descend simultaneously, the sprout is produced just as the seed ceases.”?’21 Yes, that is certainly presented there, but not in order to indicate production from other, nor in order to indicate production of inherent characteristics. Why then? It was done in order to clarify how instantaneous dependent arising is like an illusion when left unexamined. As has been explained: Since sprouts do not originate From destruction or non-destruction of seeds, You stated that any production Is like the appearance of illusions.22
To this it may be said: ‘Since seed and sprout are not simultaneous and therefore cannot be other, making production nonsensical, production should then be possible when we have simultaneity since there is then otherness, as is the case with eye consciousness and sensations and so forth that are simultaneous with it. Just as the simultaneous occurrence of eye, form and so on, and sensations and so on, produce a coinciding eye consciousness, the eye and so on, and the mind are also the very conditions for the coinciding sensations and so forth.’
That is not the case. Why? Were eye-mentation separate from what’s making it, Like co-occurring eyes, perceptions and so forth, What purpose would production serve for what exists? The problems faced if it does not have been explained. (6.20) If you claim that eyes and so forth, and the simultaneous perceptions and so forth, are the very conditions for such an eye consciousness, then being existent at that time it would be an ‘other’ relying on them, but for something existent to be produced serves no purpose at all, hence it would not be produced. Then, if wishing to avoid its non-production, you do not accept that it is existing, saying, ‘At the time in question there is no otherness of the eye and so forth in relation to the non-existent consciousness,’ the faults of such a position have already been explained. Therefore, if you claim such other-production, even if otherness was a possibility, production would be impossible, and since that is impossible both are impossible. Even if production was possible, otherness would be impossible, and since that is impossible both are impossible. Hence, external objects do not exist in any way whatsoever, and with the emptiness of external objects one is left with nothing but mere words, which shows that this way of understanding it is unacceptable.
Now, to explain how from among cause and effect there is no time when there is reliance on a cause, it was said: If separate things are made by a productive cause, Do they exist or not? Both? Neither of these two? Why need producing if they do? What’s done if not? What’s done if both? What’s done if neither of the two? (6.21) A producing cause is not the producer of an existent product, because of the faults that have already been explained in such statements as, ‘That the produced is produced once more is senseless;’ there would not then be the slightest purpose to it having conditions. When the produced does not exist, what would the producers do? It is just as non-existent as the horns of a donkey. As stated: For you who assert the existence of results, And you who assert their non-existence,23 There would be no point in embellishing Your house with pillars and such.24 And from the Middle Way Treatise: If a result has an intrinsic essence, How can a cause produce it? If a result does not have an intrinsic essence, How can a cause produce it? If there is no production, Causation becomes unfeasible. If causation is unfeasible, What becomes of the result?25
For that which is both, what would conditions do for it? The faults that follow from this are those that have already been explained. A dual entity is both, and when it is both it is in fact two. But since having an essence of existence and non-existent in one thing at the same time is impossible, something having that sort of nature cannot occur. And since it cannot occur, what could producing conditions do for it? As the Treatise states: How can nirvāṇa be both An existent and a non-existent? These two cannot coexist, Just like light and darkness.26 Likewise, What both is and is not an agent Cannot make what both is and is not. Since they are mutually exclusive, How could one thing both be and not be?27
If a result could be neither existent nor non-existent, what would be the function of conditions in relation to something which is neither, since a result that defies both existence and non-existence cannot exist? When both existence and non-existence are impossible, to refute them by saying neither existent nor non-existent doesn’t make the slightest difference. When neither are established, to have what is neither existent nor non-existent is impossible. As stated: Nirvāṇa is taught to be neither An existent nor a non-existent. If non-existents and existents were established, This would be established.28
If they say, ’Since any sort of reasoning we put forth in order to establish production is completely incinerated by the fire of your intellect, like firewood soaked in oil, we will no longer encourage the blazing fire of your intelligence with any more logical fuel. You may ask, “Will not your theory fail without backing it up with logical reasoning?” It will not. This is something established from the point of view of the world, hence there is no use at all for reasoning, since worldly perception is very powerful.’ ‘What is the point of all these reasoned arguments When it’s the normal view the world gives credence to. The world indeed agrees things come from other things, Which means other-production – what is there to prove?’ (6.22) ‘When all worldly people maintain a certain view, that is something very influential, and it is certainly other-production that is this view. When reasoning finds faults with something, it is only relevant when it comes to what is not directly perceived, and not what is within the scope of direct perception. Therefore, even though it is not reasonable, things are still produced from other.’
Those who lack an unmistaken realisation of the sense of the treatise, and are faced with the maturation of habitual tendencies for real existence developed since beginningless cyclic existence, cannot bear to hear about what separates them from their cherished fixation for existence, and therefore resort to nonsense about how the world will invalidate this. Since one cannot counteract their ravings about worldly invalidation without explaining to them the many and vast ways of origination in the world, an explanation is at this point given about the principles of the two truths, in order to clarify the particular cases of worldly invalidation: The things perceived may either be correct or false. As such all things convey a dual character. Correctly seen, the object is reality; As taught, the truth is relative when falsely seen. (6.23) In this context, the illustrious buddhas knowing unmistakenly the reality of the two truths taught that all external and internal existent things – compounded phenomena, sprouts and so forth – have a dual nature, namely the relative (saṃvṛti) and the ultimate (paramārtha). The ultimate is the actual nature accessible in the domain of superior wisdom for those with genuine vision, but which is not something established in and of itself – this is one nature. The other is the independent existence perceived owing to the false perception of ordinary beings whose mind’s eye is completely covered by the blurring cataracts of ignorance. The objects that the infantile perceive in this manner are not intrinsically established. All existent things are thereby perceived with these two natures. And with respect to these two natures, that which is the object of genuine seeing is the actual reality, which is the meaning of the term ultimate truth. Its nature will be further explained. That which is the object of false seeing is the relative truth.
Then, having in this way presented the principle of two truths, to now demonstrate that in relation to those who see falsely there are two ways of seeing, genuine and false, and hence also a duality in relation to the object and consciousness when perceiving, it was said: As faculties may function well or be at fault, One further reckons two types of the falsely seen. Compared to knowledge stemming from sound faculties, What’s known through faulty faculties is held as false. (6.24) Those with clear faculties, free of cataracts and unimpaired by jaundice and so forth, unmistakenly apprehend external objects the way they are. The opposite is the case for those with impaired faculties. Compared to the understanding of those with sound faculties, the understanding of those with impaired faculties is considered mistaken.
In order to illustrate that, ‘Just as their understanding may be of two types, either mistaken or unmistaken, the same is the case with objects,’ it was explained: Perceptions of the world that happens when Six faculties have not been compromised Are true within the world, the rest are all Considered false according to the world. (6.25) Internal conditions that impair the faculties are such things as cataracts, jaundice and so on, and ingesting datura and the like. External conditions that distort the faculties are oil, water and mirrors, sounds and so on made inside a cave and the like, and sunlight under particular conditions of location or time, and so on. These impair the faculties without being internal, causing perceptions such as reflections, echoes and mirages of water. Magical formulas, potions and so on, employed for instance by illusionists, should likewise be included within this category. What impairs the mind are these things, as well as mistaken philosophical systems and so on, and apparently sound inferences. These are explained in terms of the principles of dreams and so on. Therefore, the understanding that the world gains through the sixfold faculties, when none of the mentioned conditions impairing one’s faculties are present, is considered true from the worldly perspective, but not for a noble one. Reflections and so forth, appearing with the nature of objects when the faculties are compromised in a certain way, are mistaken from the worldly point of view.
To provide some examples to illustrate the sense of what has just been explained, it was said: Ideas diverse misguided thinkers have made up When tossed around within the sleep of ignorance, And notions from illusions, mirages and such, Not even worldly folk will think that these are real. (6.26) The misguided (tīrthika), in their quest to reach the actual reality, fail to properly and unmistakenly comprehend the way of production, cessation and so on of entities well-known even to such uneducated individuals as cowherds, women and so forth. Their search for perfection resembles letting go of the lower branch before having taken hold of the higher branch when climbing a tree: their grave mistakes will send them plummeting into the ravine of faulty views. Not seeing the two truths they fail to reach their goal. Thus, the three properties (guṇa)29 and so on that they conceive of do not exist even in the worldly relative sense.
This being the case: Perceptions of the ones impaired by eye disease Cannot invalidate what’s known by healthy ones. Just so, a mind which lacks the wisdom beyond taint Cannot invalidate a flawless intellect. (6.27) The refutation of other-production demonstrated here is not a mere worldly viewpoint. What then? It is the accepted vision of noble ones. This refutation of production being extraordinary, just as an undistorted apprehension cannot be invalidated by someone with cataracts disease who perceives hair-strands and the like, undefiled vision cannot be invalidated by the understanding of ordinary beings lacking undefiled wisdom, and worldly ones cannot therefore invalidate that which falls within this sort of domain. They are truly laughable opponents for a noble one. We therefore have two truths, and by distinguishing between a relative and an ultimate, entities are said to have a dual essence.
In order to describe the worldly relative truth, it was said: It’s relative, delusion, when the real is masked. Regarding as the truth what is in fact contrived Is relative truth, this is what the sage expressed – And that which is contrived is simply relative. (6.28) As it obscures sentient beings’ ability to see things for what they are, it is confusion; and this condition of ignorance superimposing non-factual inherent characteristics to things, concealing the perception of the actual, is the relative (saṃvṛti). This relative causes things to be experienced as real, and that which lacks inherent nature is seen as inherently distinct. As this is relatively true for the mistaken world, it is the worldly relative truth. It is contrived interdependence. Certain dependently arisen things, like reflections, echoes and so forth, appear as false also to the ignorant, while certain things like blueness and the like, and such things as material form, mind and feelings, appear as true. The actual does not appear in any way whatsoever to the ignorant. The latter, as well those things that also relatively are false, are therefore not the relative truth. As such, the relative truth is a principle relevant as long as one has the afflicted ignorance involved in the links of existence.
The hearers, solitary buddhas and bodhisattvas have relinquished afflicted vision, and not entertaining assumptions about truth they experience conditioned things as similar to reflections and such, contrived in nature but not real. For the immature these things are deceptive, while for the others they are dependently originated, like illusions and so forth, and therefore merely relative. Since they relate to this with only cognitively obscured ignorance, it does appear to noble ones in the appearance-associated domain, but not while in the appearance-free domain. Buddhas have fully and perfectly realised phenomena in all their aspects, and it is therefore held that they have arrested the movement of mind and mental factors for good. The Illustrious One thus taught that there is the relative truth and the merely relative. What is ultimate for ordinary beings is merely relative in the appearance-associated domain of noble ones, while the ultimate for the latter is its emptiness-nature. The buddhas’ ultimate is the very nature itself. As this is undeceiving it is the ultimate truth, and something they have a direct personal experience with. Since the relative truth is deceptive it is not an ultimate truth.
Having covered the relative truth, the ultimate truth should be described. That, however, is impossible to explicitly indicate because it is ineffable and not a knowable object. To elucidate its nature to those who are interested with something they are familiar with, an example is therefore employed: That faulty image one presumes – those falling hairs Which come when one is suffering from an eye disease – Is seen for what it is by one with proper sight; At present we may thus deduce reality. (6.29) Witnessing how someone suffering from cataracts, through the influence of that ailment sees such things as accumulating strands of hair filling for instance the rhinoceros-bowl he is holding, and his struggle to get rid of them by repeatedly upending the bowl, the one without cataracts might wonder, ‘What is he doing?’ and approach him. And even though she directs her eyes to the area of the supposed hair she does not perceive any hairs, and will also not entertain concepts of particular attributes related to these hairs, such as being things or non-things, hairs or not, dark blue and so forth. So, when the cataract-ridden individual relates his thinking to the one without cataracts, saying, ‘I see hairs,’ the other will want to clear away these concepts. And although she will certainly reject the perspective of the one with cataracts, and say, ‘There are no hairs,’ she isn’t actually denying them. The healthy one sees the actual reality of the hair-strands; the other doesn’t. Similarly, the nature of the aggregates, elements, sense fields and so forth perceived by those impaired by the cataracts of ignorance and unable to see the actual reality, is the relative nature of these things. But like the cataract-free individual looking at the hair-strands, when the illustrious buddhas who are free from the habitual patterns of ignorance view those very aggregates and so forth, they see their real nature, and this is their ultimate truth.
‘But there couldn’t be any seeing of such a nature, could there? So how do they then see?’ Though that is true, it is said that, ‘It’s by not seeing it that they see.’ As indicated at length in the noble Accessing the Two Truths: Devaputra. If ultimately the ultimate truth was a physical, verbal or mental object, it couldn’t be considered the ultimate truth; it would be the relative truth. Ultimately, Devaputra, the ultimate truth is beyond all conventions, undifferentiated, unproduced, unceasing, and beyond something expressed and an expressing, something known and a knowing. The ultimate truth, Devaputra, transcends being an object of the omniscient wisdom of those endowed with the most supreme of all aspects, and isn’t expressed by words such as ultimate truth. All phenomena are false; they are deceptive phenomena. The ultimate truth cannot be described, Devaputra. Why? No such phenomena as someone showing, something shown and someone shown to can appear ultimately. And non-apparent phenomena cannot explain non-apparent phenomena.30 Thus, distinctions such as objective entity and non-entity, own-entity and other-entity, truth and non-truth, durability and termination, permanence and impermanence, happiness and suffering, pure and impure, self and non-self, empty and non-empty, characteristics and characterised, oneness and difference, arising and ceasing and so forth cannot be found in the actual reality, because it has no observable nature. Only noble beings therefore have a valid consideration of actual reality – those who are not noble beings do not.
If one insists that the world can invalidate it, and professes that the worldly perspective is a valid way of analysing actual reality, then: If worldly standards were correct the world would see Reality; what need for other noble ones? Would there be reason to traverse the noble path? It’s senseless that the standards of a fool are sound. (6.30) If one were to accept that the worldly perspective is valid knowledge, and that the actual reality is seen by them, one would have to accept that they have relinquished ignorance, because a fool having valid knowledge is unreasonable. Someone who lacks understanding of a certain object is considered unreliable in relation to that thing, such as someone who lacks knowledge of how to examine precious stones. If the eyes and so forth could ascertain the actual reality, then endeavouring in moral discipline, learning, contemplation, meditation and so forth in order to actualise the noble path would be pointless. Hence this cannot be the case.
Therefore, Since worldly standards are not valid all the way, The world cannot disprove what is reality. As was explained above, at the level of actual reality the worldly perspective is in every respect invalid. Thus, when the context is actual reality, the worldly cannot invalidate it.What can the worldly perspective invalidate? To explain: But worldly objects are agreed on in the world, So they’ll disprove you if you do reject these things. (6.31) For instance, if someone were to say, ‘Something of mine has been stolen,’ and another poses the question, ‘What thing was it?’, and they reply, ‘A vase,’ and the other refutes it, saying, ‘A vase is not a thing, because it is a cognitive object, like a dream-vase;’ denials of objects like this the world can invalidate, since there is worldly consensus about mundane things. But when it comes to the level of the noble ones’ vision and learned individuals making valid analyses, the worldly cannot invalidate these. Learned ones may apply this position also when examining other things.31
With this, worldly invalidation has been avoided even if it was the case that worldly convention accepted other-production. However, since there is no other-production even from the worldly perspective, also when resorting to the worldly perspective one will not be able to invalidate the refutation of other-production using their view. To show this, it was said: A worldly person may just sow a seed But later say, ‘I have produced this child,’ Or else believe that he, ‘did plant this tree.’ No other-rising hence within the world. (6.32) When it becomes evident that the child is male, a man will say, ‘I produced this boy.’ However, it is not as though a boy having those features is ejected from his body and put into the mother. There is merely an excretion in the form of a seed. But it is clearly the worldly opinion that, since it was due to his depositing the cause that a child then emerged, semen and child are not separate. If they were separate it would be as if they were distinct entities, and one wouldn’t then express it like that. The same may be applied to the seed and the tree.
Thus, to indicate the virtues of interdependence in terms of avoiding permanence and nihilism when explained in the above manner, it was said: Because the sprout and seed are not distinct, Seeds haven’t been destroyed when sprouts are there. And since they neither are the very same, We wouldn’t say the seeds exist with sprouts. (6.33) If the sprout was other than the seed, the sprout’s presence would unequivocally mean that the seed was terminated – since the presence of wild oxen does not prevent dead cattle from ceasing to exist, and the presence of ordinary beings does nothing to the transcendence (nirvāṇa) of noble ones. But because they are not distinct, the identity of being a sprout does not terminate the seed, and in this way nihilism is avoided. And because they are not identical the very thing which is seed is not the sprout, and since this prevents imperishability, permanence is avoided.
As taught: If seed exists, so does sprout; But seed is not the sprout itself. It is not other, it is not it – hence, Dharmatā is neither permanence nor nihilism.32 If seed exists… means that, ‘When there is an existence of seed, then….’ If it is suggested that, ‘A sprout arising with the seed as its cause cannot really be different from the seed,’ it states here: But seed is not the sprout itself. If asking, ‘Doesn’t the seed turn into the sprout?’ Then we have the statement: It is not other, it is not it – …. Since both the positions of sameness and otherness are impossible, neither that it is distinct and nor that it is not distinct will be reasonable. Hence, with both options refuted, that the nature of things (dharmatā) is beyond permanence and nihilism becomes manifestly apparent. The essential point to be understood here is this: If seed and sprout were endowed with any sense of inherent existence (svabhāva), they would have to be either the same or different. But when they have no such inherent existence, being just like seeds and sprouts appearing in a dream, how can there then be actual oneness or difference. This is the very sense of the following explanation: Formations are the consequence of ignorance, But those formations are not present in that itself Formations and ignorance are empty By nature, free from fluctuation.33 And as stated in the Treatise: Whatever is dependently arisen from something Is not then that exact same thing, Nor is it other than it – Hence, no permanence, no annihilation.34
That, ‘There is no inherent production whatsoever,’ is something one absolutely must accept. If it wasn’t so: If things existed with their own identity, Rejecting this would mean the ruin of these things, And emptiness would be destroying entities. This makes no sense, and therefore things do not exist. (6.34) If things such as material form and sensation were produced from causes and conditions with inherent characteristics, with their own essence and nature, when the yogi then sees entities as empty of inherent nature and realises that all dharmas lack inherent nature, his realisation of emptiness would occur through a rejection of an inherent nature that was actually produced like that. Then, just as such things as hammers can cause the destruction of vases and so forth, this emptiness would discard the intrinsic nature of things, which would not be justified. Therefore, that things have inherent characteristics would never be acceptable.
As taught at length in the noble Heap of Jewels Sutra: Furthermore, Kāśyapa, the correct middle way approach to analysing dharmas is the following: It is not emptiness that makes dharmas empty; dharmas themselves are empty. It is not characterlessness that makes dharmas characterless; dharmas themselves are characterless. It is not aimlessness that makes dharmas aimless; dharmas themselves are aimless. It is not fabricationlessness that makes dharmas fabricationless; dharmas themselves are fabricationless. It is not productionlessness that makes dharmas productionless; dharmas themselves are productionless. It is not originationlessness that makes dharmas originationless; dharmas themselves are originationless.35 Some assert a dependent nature, and thinking that its contingent emptiness characterised by a lack of apprehender and apprehended can neither be expressed as same nor different – just as with impermanence and so forth – they are saying that, ‘It is only through emptiness itself that all things are empty, and not by their very nature.’36 As the Four Hundred Verses explains: One cannot regard the non-empty as empty, And then think, ‘I shall reach nirvana.’ Mistaken ideas do not lead to nirvana – That is what the tathāgatas have declared.37 And, as the Treatise states: The victorious ones spoke of emptiness As the relinquishment of every view, And stated that those who take emptiness As a view accomplish nothing.38
Here, some say: ‘Indeed there is no production ultimately, based on the refutation of production from self and other. But direct perception and inference shows us that the nature of material form, sensation and so forth are undoubtedly other-produced. If this is not maintained, why say there are two truths? One would end up with just a single truth. And then other-production would be entirely non-existent.’ To this we reply: That is indeed true, and ultimately there aren’t two truths as seen in statements such as, ‘Mendicants. The highest truth is only one, namely: the undeceiving objective is transcendence. All composite phenomena are deceptive false objects.’39 Accordingly, since the relative truth is the means for accessing the ultimate truth, when production from self and other is left unanalysed, the worldly perspective is acknowledged. Thus: When analysed there’s nothing that remains of things Except the very nature of reality. And thus the things which are conventions of the world Are not to be subjected to analysis. (6.35) And so, when material form, sensation and so forth are scrutinised in this manner, asking, ‘Are they produced from self, or are they produced from other?’, since there is ultimately neither production nor cessation, apart from the essential nature nothing other by way of production and so forth remains. Therefore, dispensing with thorough analysis of these things, such as asking, ‘Is it from self or other…?’, one should merely take one’s cue from the other and acknowledge what is observed by the worldly when they say, ‘If this is present, this arises.’
As Āryadeva explained: Just as through a foreign tongue Barbarians cannot be brought to understanding, One will not make the world understand Unless using the worldly perspective.40 And as stated in the Treatise: Without relying on the conventional One cannot realise the ultimate. Without realising the ultimate One cannot reach transcendence.41 Worldly conventions collapse when subjected to analysis. As taught at length in the sutras: If for instance three things are combined, Some wood, some string and a practiced hand, Pleasant sounds will issue from The tūṇa, vīnā, sughoṣaka and such.42 But though a learned person were to explore Where they are going and whence they came, Searching the four directions and in-between, He will fail to find the sounds’ coming and going. Likewise, from causes and conditions All composite phenomena are produced; But the yogi endowed with authentic vision Sees these composites as empty and fickle. The aggregates, elements and sensory fields Are empty within and empty without; The sentient lacking selfhood have no abode – Space-like nature is the hallmark of dharmas.43
One may interject: ‘If every type of adherence to things is to be eliminated, we are perplexed as to what to do with this adherence to a conventional truth; there has to be some sort of substantial nature produced which acts as the cause for thoroughly afflicted and completely purified states.’ This way of expressing it too though is nothing but mere words. Why? No reasoning permits production from itself Or other at the level of reality. It can’t be justified even conventionally. So then, by what can your production be sustained? (6.36) Just as on the ultimate level the above explained reasoning does not allow for production from self or other, also conventionally it renders production illogical – how then can your production of entities be maintained? Therefore, though unwilling, one must by necessity accept the statement, ‘In neither of the two truths does production with distinct characteristics (svalakṣaṇa) occur.’ Some look at the statement, ‘Not from self …,’ and think that master Nāgārjuna is only refuting the imputed nature (parikalpitasvabhāva) and not the dependent nature (paratantrasvabhāva). This assertion of theirs is unreasonable and cannot be maintained, and those who speak like this will certainly be disproved.44
‘But if there is no production with distinct identities in either of the truths, how is it that their distinct natures are observed in the world?’ To explain: Such empty objects as reflections and the like Are not unheard of when conditions do convene. And just as from reflections and such empty things Cognitions with their aspects are indeed produced, (6.37) It is the same with every empty entity, As from these very empty things, things do emerge. All phenomena remain inseparable from the workings of cause and effect. So, what learned individual, when considering the causality involved in the appearance of an insubstantial reflection, would perceive this mere existence of nothing other than a causal process involving material form, sensation and so forth, and become convinced of it having a truly existent nature? Therefore, although its existence is perceived, there is no intrinsic production taking place. As stated: O Druma, though it has no true nature, A reflection may still appear to be Within a spotless mirror. This is how You should come to understand phenomena.45
Hence, And since true character exists in neither truth, There’s nothing that’s eternal or that terminates. (6.38) Because things are empty of an inherent nature, like the appearance of reflections, they are in nature essenceless both in the ultimate and relative truths, and both permanence and nihilism are therefore avoided. As the Treatise for instance states: ‘It is not so that what intrinsically exists Is non-existent’ – this is eternalism. To say, ‘It was before, but now is no more,’ Implies that one professes nihilism.46 Likewise: With the acceptance of existent things The views of eternalism and nihilism follow, Because an existent thing must be Either permanent or impermanent.47 And similarly: Through mastery of magical emanation The Teacher can make an emanation appear, And that emanated emanation again Can make further emanations appear. The actor and enacted karmic act Are similarly a display of emanations – Like an emanation that emanates Yet another emanation. The afflictions, actions, bodies, Karmic agents and results Are like the city of gandharvas, Similar to dreams and mirages.48 This example of magical emanations demonstrates how things lacking inherence produce things lacking inherence.
Since there is therefore no intrinsic nature in either truth, the views of eternalism and nihilism are thoroughly abandoned. In addition, there will be no need to justify the link between the result and the karmic act, even when a long time has passed since the act took place, by resorting to such ideas as a substrate consciousness, karmic indelibility and obtention. How so? Because it doesn’t really cease to be, Though there’s no substrate, still the potency Of karma stays long after it has ceased, And will produce effects – this you should know. (6.39) Those for whom karmic acts cease will in response to the critical remark, ‘How can a karmic act that has ceased to be give rise to a result?’, venture to confirm the potential of ceased karmic acts by maintaining a substrate consciousness, a separate indelible dharma similar to a promissory note, obtention, or that there is a continuum of consciousness that takes on the karmic imprints.49 But for those for whom karmic acts are not inherently produced, they also do not cease; and since it is not impossible for a result to manifest from what has not been destroyed, when the karmic acts do not perish the link between the karmic act and its result becomes perfectly tenable. As the Treatise states: Karma is not produced because It has no inherent nature at all. And since it is unproduced, It also does not cease to be.50 And from the sutras: A human lifespan is a hundred years, Thus we call that a lifetime. But one cannot gather years in a heap. This is established in a similar way. When we say, ‘It is not exhausted,’ And when we say, ‘Karma is exhausted,’ The empty aspect is its non-exhaustion, Conventionally its exhaustion is taught.51
To explain through simile the sense of what was just related: The foolish man who has a pleasant dream Is still desirous when waking up. And likewise, though the karmic act has ceased And lacks reality, it has results. (6.40) As stated in the Transmigration Sutra: Great King. Take for instance a man who is asleep and dreams of having intercourse with a beautiful lady, and on waking keeps yearning for her. What’s your opinion, Great King? Would such a man as this, who first dreams that he has intercourse with a beautiful lady and then having awoken still yearns for her, be a wise man? He replied: No, Illustrious One, he would not. And why? Illustrious One, that dream-woman is non-existent; she cannot be perceived, let alone be a partner in intercourse. That man has nothing in store for him but misery and fatigue. The Illustrious One said: It is similar, Great King, for immature and uninformed ordinary beings who on seeing material things crave material enjoyment. Craving these things they become attached. With attachment they bring about physical, verbal and mental karmic actions through desire, anger and confusion. When those karmic acts have been consummated, they cease. Having ceased they do not remain in the east … (and so forth), or in the intermediate directions. At a later time, when the moment of death arrives, the associated karma is activated as the final moment of consciousness ceases. At that time, it is just as in the example of the beautiful lady of he who awoke from sleep: one will tend towards that very mental karma. Thus, Great King, as that final moment of consciousness ceases, the first moment of consciousness belonging to the next birth determines whether one appears among the gods … (and so forth), or among the deprived spirits. As soon as that first moment of consciousness ceases, Great King, a mindstream that accords with the resultant manifest experience arises. While there are no phenomena whatsoever, Great King, that are transferred from this world to the next, death and rebirth are still evident. Great King, the ceasing of the final moment of consciousness is what we call ‘death’, while the initial moment of consciousness belonging to the next birth is what we call ‘rebirth’. But, Great King, as the final moment of consciousness ceases it doesn’t go anywhere. And the initial moment of consciousness belonging to the next birth doesn’t come from anywhere either. How can that be so? Because it is devoid of inherent existence. That final moment of consciousness Great King, is empty of a final moment of consciousness; death is empty of death; karma is empty of karma; the initial moment of consciousness is empty of an initial moment of consciousness; rebirth is empty of rebirth; and karmas do not disappear.52
Some might think: ‘Say one accepts that not being inherently produced it is not spent,53 and this is why there can be a ripening result. In that case, since the ripening manifests without it having ceased, there will likewise be another ripening after the initial ripening has taken place because it hasn’t been spent. And, since after that ripening there will be yet another ripening, this leads to the fault of infinite regress.’ This will not be the case: Just as with cataracts one will see hairs And not just any other random thing, Although as non-existents they’re the same The ripened won’t be ripening again. (6.41) As an example, take objects that are similar in that they are nonexistent: someone with cataracts will see nonexistent objects such as strands of hair, but not the appearance of other types of things, such as a donkey’s horns and a barren woman’s child. Likewise, while the natures of karmas are equal in their non-cessation, they have specific ripening results.
This example not only shows that karma isn’t unspecific, but also that its maturation is specific. To explain: The negative will therefore further woe, While virtues lead to what is fortunate. It’s freedom to see neither good nor bad. To question karmic links was still deterred. (6.42) Though virtuous and non-virtuous karmas lack intrinsic essence, still, just as there is a sense of certainty for the one seeing hair strands, non-virtue will not have have a pleasant outcome while virtue will not have an unpleasant outcome. When not apprehending karma as virtuous and non-virtuous one is liberated. The Illustrious One saw that if ordinary beings were to enter into very detailed analyses of it, they could end up denying karmic consequences and demolishing the relative. Stating that, ‘The workings of karmic consequences are inconceivable,’ he thus discouraged speculation about the workings of karmic actions and results.
‘If this is how the relationship between karmic actions and results is posited, when it is stated in the Descent Onto Lanka54 that the substrate consciousness is the basis of all the unlimited particular potentials, containing the seeds that cause the production of all things, like the ocean is for the waves, can this then be something utterly unproduced in every respect?’ That is not how it is, because the statements presenting this as something existent were given in order to instruct disciples. It should be understood that it is as an approximation of the nature of all things that what is in fact emptiness is described with the term substrate consciousness. Not only is the substrate consciousness then existent, but the person too exists – such statements of their existence are given in order to nurture individuals who need to be trained. It was for instance stated: O mendicants. The five aggregates are the burden. The carrier of the burden is the person.55 To some it was taught that there are only the aggregates; and terms such as mind, mentation and consciousness were used when explaining that, ‘By immersing oneself with faith, moral discipline and so forth, one will improve, and in future lives take rebirth in the higher realms.’ But all such teachings were given with intentional ambiguity. If one wonders what the intention behind them was, it is said: And so, for those who are not able to Accommodate the most profound of views, He taught a substrate, that the person does Exist, that aggregates alone exist. (6.43) The kinds of students who have previously had prolonged exposure to misguided (tīrthika) views will struggle to assimilate the profound nature of things (dharmatā), and become frightened when hearing statements such as, ‘I am not, nor will I be ….’56 When from the very outset they relate to the instructions of the Teacher like they would the edge of a precipice, backing away from it, they will not accomplish the supreme goal. By initially presenting them with such topics as the substrate consciousness, their misguided beliefs are counteracted as they are steered towards the greater purpose of these instructions. Since they will later, when gaining an unmistaken understanding of the teachings, naturally abandon these, it is definitely a beneficial approach and in no way mistaken. As Āryadeva explained: One should first of all assess Their particular inclinations. If estranged they will never become Vessels for the sacred Dharma.57
For didactic reasons not only did he teach topics such as the substrate consciousness, but also: He taught by saying I and mine, although Free from the view of an identity. And likewise, though things lack inherent truth, He taught provisionally that they exist. (6.44) Although he had relinquished any ego and mine by leaving behind the identity view in its entirety, as worldly convention uses terms such as I and mine as a means of communication, the Illustrious One taught using the expressions I and mine. Similarly, although things do not have an intrinsic nature, teaching that they exist can be a means for leading the worldly to understanding, and thus he taught their existence. As stated at length in the Verses Agreeing with the Pūrvaśaila School: If the guides of the world Did not conform with the world, Nobody would know about Buddha Or the Buddhist teachings. While knowing that the aggregates, Elements and sense fields are of one nature, He taught about the three realms To accord with the world. Though phenomena are unnameable, He expressed himself to beings Using an inconceivable variety of terms To accord with the world. He taught the non-existence of things, While dwelling in the nature of awakening Where there is no non-existence at all, To accord with the world. Though seeing no objects nor non-objects, The supreme of speakers professed Cessation and the ultimate truth To accord with the world. Though being without destruction and creation Things are equal in the realm of phenomena, He taught about the inferno of the aeon To accord with the world. Although the nature of sentient beings Is not observed throughout the three times, He taught about the characters of beings To accord with the world.58
The proponents of consciousness cannot accept the teachings of the Middle Way, and therefore express the tradition they themselves have conceptually fashioned regarding how to regard objects in order to dispel what has been explained here, saying: When bodhisattvas dwell within intelligence They know reality to be just consciousness; No subject can be seen without the object, thus They find the triple realm to be the mind alone. (6.45) The word established means to dwell. To be established in intelligence is to dwell in intelligence (prajñā); and the one who is there is established in intelligence, is practicing intelligence. The bodhisattvas refers to those who have reached Present. Those who unmistakenly and without any superimposition whatsoever know, see and fully comprehend the actual reality, know reality. This then forms part of the phrase … know reality to be simply consciousness. Since they realise that in the absence of material form the mind and mental states are merely dependently arisen entities, they know reality to be simply consciousness. One may ask how they know the actual reality to be simply consciousness. That is why it is said, ‘Seeing no subject in the absence of objects, and realising the three realms as mere consciousness….’ Through the presented reasoning the bodhisattvas come to see that, as there are no apprehended objects, there is also no apprehending subject, and then cultivate the thought, ‘…the three realms are mere consciousness…,’ over an extended period of time. Through this cultivation they come to see mere inexpressible entities through self-cognition, and gradually realise the actual reality as mere consciousness.
‘If they are simply consciousness; in the absence of external objects how can a consciousness bearing their aspects arise?’ To this they say: It is just like the waves that will appear Upon the ocean as by wind it’s stirred, When from the substrate, seed of all, appears Just consciousness by self-potential spurred. (6.46) When a stretch of water in the ocean, the supporter of waves, is agitated by the wind, through the conditioning wind’s stirrings one can discern the movements of rising waves previously dormant, as if they are competing to assume a physical identity. Similarly, the continuum of consciousness has been ongoing since beginningless time, and as tendencies for grasping at subject and object ripen things assume particular identities. When these cease they leave particular imprints in the substrate consciousness that serve as causes for later occurrences of consciousnesses with similar features. Eventually the conditions for them to ripen stir, and they reach ripening. It is in relation to these impure merely dependent occurrences that immature beings then impute concepts of subject and object where there are in fact no objects whatsoever apart from consciousness. As the proponents of an almighty god (īśvara) and so forth will say: Just as the spider is the cause of the spiderweb, The water-crystal is for water, And the fig-tree for its branches, He is the cause for all things embodied.59 Just as those who profess such things as an almighty god as the creator of the world, the proponents of a substrate consciousness claim that the substrate consciousness is the omnific source (sarvabījaka), since it is the fundamental seed of all things perceived. The only difference between them is that the almighty god is said to be permanent while the substrate consciousness is impermanent.
‘Since this is the way it is clearly presented in the scriptures: And this dependent nature is the source From whence ideas of real things then appear – Appears without external things, exists, In nature free from all abstracting thought. (6.47) ‘The dependent nature must unquestionably be accepted, since it is held to be the basis for the entire interlacing matrix of thought. One cannot mistake a rope for a snake without the rope as a contingent cause, and one cannot mistake earth and so forth for a vase without the contingent causes of earth and so forth; the latter would not happen in relation to the element of space. Likewise, in the absence of external objects, what would be the rationale for such thoughts as blue and so forth to occur? Hence, one must inevitably accept that the dependent nature is the cause of thoughts; it is the cause for the conditions of thorough affliction and complete purification. In this way, emptiness may be properly understood through statements such as: “What lacks a certain thing is found to be empty of that, while that which remains is what actually exists.” This is the authentic and precise understanding granting unmistaken access to emptiness.60 ‘It is by nature beyond the scope of all elaboration, and since verbal expression relies on designations there is no way to communicate it through the medium of words. Thus, to summarise, the dependent nature is here presented as threefold: (1) it arises solely from its own imprints without knowable objects; (2) it has existence; and (3) it is not within the scope of any mental elaboration. That it is the cause for things having imputed existence is established by the fact of its existence, and this is therefore not a point apart from the aforementioned three.’
To this we say: But how can mind be there without external things? This should be investigated. They might reply: ‘It’s like a dream,’ you say. … ‘Someone asleep inside a tiny room might dream that the room is filled with a herd of mad elephants, which is not at all the case. That there can be consciousness in the absence of external objects must therefore necessarily be acknowledged.’ To show that this is completely unfounded, it is said: … Well, let’s consider that: How? Well, For me, in dreams as well my mind does not exist, Which means that your example is not relevant. (6.48) The cognition appearing as a herd of mad elephants61 is for us as non-existent as the object itself, because it is unproduced. And when consciousness is non-existent, this example will not be applicable for both of us, and therefore there is no existent consciousness in the absence of external things.
They might think, ’But if the mistaken cognition of the dream does not exist, one shouldn’t then be able to remember one’s dream-experiences when waking up.’ This too is unsound, in that If mind exists since dreams can be recalled When waking, then external things should too, Why? Since just as you recall the thought ‘I saw,’ You do remember these external things. (6.49) If the memory of the dream-experience meant that mind exists, the object too would then exist since the experience of the object is also remembered. The unavoidable alternative is to say that consciousness does not exist.
To this they reply: ‘If appearances of such things as elephants in dreams did exist, the eye-consciousness should also be operative then since they are being apprehended; but it is not, since the fivefold collection of consciousness is interrupted by sleep and hence not present.’ Thus, You claim, ‘It’s not there when one is asleep, because There is no visual consciousness, just conscious mind, Its images believed to be external things. And as in dreams, the same is taking place right now.’ (6.50) ‘When dreaming the eye-consciousness is in every way absent, and with that absent there cannot be an eye sense field (āyatana) apprehending the appearances of such things as elephants; but the mental consciousness is operative. Therefore, it cannot be denied that external forms are absent, and that it is the features of one’s own consciousness that are taken to be external. And just as it is only consciousness appearing in dreams without external things, the same is the case now.’
That is not so, since it is impossible for the mental consciousness to arise in dreams. So, Just like for you externals are not there In dreams, the mind as well is not produced. Hence, All three, the eye, the object seen, the mind Which they engender, each of these are false. (6.51) The perception of forms happens when the eye, the form and the mind are in proximity. Likewise, when objects are distinguished in dreams, a coming together of these three is observed. And just as in that context eyes and form are found to be non-existent, eye-consciousness too has no existence. And just as with these three, the same is the case for the rest: The rest, with ears and such, are unproduced. The words ears and so forth include the rest, from sound and ear consciousness up to and including mentation, mental phenomena and mental consciousness. Thus, since all of these triads are false within the dream, it makes no sense to say that the mental consciousness exists in dreams. Some think that, ‘The form apprehended by the mental consciousness belongs to the sense field of mental phenomena, and does exist in the dream. Hence, it is not at all the case that consciousness exists without objects.’ But this sentiment is also unreasonable, since the three are utterly unfeasible in dreams. If they say they have accepted this in order disprove the scriptural tradition of the others, the dream example becomes meaningless, because what is deemed not false cannot serve to illustrate things that are considered false.
To explain that, since the three are unreal in dreams, this may be used as a proof to confirm unsubstantiality, and that therefore in the waking state as well all phenomena are shown to be without intrinsic nature, it was said: The same holds true awake as when you dream Since all things are deceptive; there’s no mind, There are no objects and no faculties. (6.52) It should be acknowledged that, just as in dreams objects, faculties and consciousness are false, the same is the case in the waking state. Hence: As when perceiving illusory beings That appear while not really there, The Sugata taught that these phenomena Are like illusions, similar to dreams.62 Similarly, Existence as a being is like a dream – None are born, there are none who die. The labels and lives of beings are not found; These dharmas are like bubbles and plantain trees.63 These and similar statements clearly express this.
Thus, these three are explained to be unproduced both with regard to the cognition of waking life and the dream state: But just as one may see them when asleep, The three are still here now when we’re awake. While the sleep of unknowing remains, for those who have emerged from the sleep state and are awake, these three parts continue to be present – even though not produced in and of themselves – as dream perceptions caused by the sleep of ignorance. The same is the case for those who are asleep and have not emerged from the state of dreaming; this triad exists with the same type of nature also then. And just as when awake the three are gone, They’re gone when from delusion’s sleep we wake. (6.53) When sleep ends and one is awake, the dream perceptions involving the three do not persist. Likewise, for those who have fully eradicated the sleep of ignorance and directly perceive the dharma expanse (dharmadhātu), these three do not exist. Hence, consciousness does not exist in the absence of external phenomena.
They might argue: ’Someone with cataracts does perceive things that are non-existent, such as hairs. Therefore consciousness must exist without external things.’ This is also untenable. Why? The hairs an eye disease will make appear; The mind which the afflicted sense affects; His intellect will see them both as real. With healthy sight they are both seen as false. (6.54) This is to be regarded exactly as with dreams. From the perspective of the one with cataracts the appearance of hairs exists, while from the perspective of the one without cataracts both are unproduced, since one can hardly confirm consciousness in the absence of objects.
This must necessarily be agreed to. Otherwise, If there could be cognition without something known, One would expect that healthy vision too should know These hairs when gazing at the spot where hairs appear. This doesn’t happen, hence this cannot be the case. (6.55) If a cognition having the features of hair strands could arise for the one with cataracts without existing hair strands, then someone without cataracts directing their gaze to the same place where the one with cataracts is seeing hairs should also have a mental experience of them, since they are equally non-existent for both. Hence it is illogical to say that consciousness arises in the absence of objects.
They might say: ’This would be the case if an existent object was the cause for the arising of consciousness. So how is it? It is the ripening or non-ripening of former imprints deposited in the consciousness that determines whether a particular consciousness arises or not. Hence, only when an imprint of another cognition in the form of hair strands left there ripens, does a cognition having these features occur; otherwise not.’ To then explain how this too is unfeasible: ‘There is no ripe potential for the healthy one, And therefore he does not have this experience; It’s not because there’s nothing there that can be known.’ But since potential is unreal this doesn’t work. (6.56) … such a knowable object is lacking means that the knowable thing does not exist. Only if a so-called potential was something existent would there be the occurrence or non-occurrence of consciousness related to its ripening or non-ripening. Therefore this doesn’t prove it.
So why can’t potential exist? To explain: Potential for what has arisen cannot be, Nor can it be for what in fact is unproduced. Is this assumed potential something connected with a present consciousness, or with a past or future consciousness? In the case of a produced present consciousness, there cannot be potential. When we talk of the potential’s we are using the sixth case,64 and to say that the essentially resultant consciousness is itself the very cause is illogical. If it were, we would have a causeless result, and once the sprout is produced the seed would also not be destroyed. Therefore it is impossible for a produced consciousness to have potential. When we say from the potential we are using the fifth case,65 and as has already been explained, since it is existent it would be illogical for a produced consciousness to then originate from a potential. Hence there cannot be potential for that which is already a product. Nor can that consciousness, when by nature unproduced, have potential. Because With no distinction one cannot distinguish it, Or else the barren woman’s son would be a fact. (6.57) Without something distinct one cannot make distinctions. How so? When referring to consciousness potential, consciousness distinguishes the potential, and potential is the basis distinguished. But a thing yet to be produced cannot be used to indicate negation or affirmation in relation to something, saying it is a consciousness such-and-such or non-consciousness such-and-such. That being the case, what sort of distinction would one then actually be making by saying it is the potential for that? And when it can’t be distinguished as such, to say that will come from it won’t serve to identify it, and one isn’t actually indicating anything at all. If one still insists that something unproduced can have potential, one would have to agree that a barren woman can have a son. Therefore, potential for something unproduced cannot exist.’sfrom
They might then think: ‘The consciousness in question is an anticipated consciousness that will arise by virtue of this potential, and as it is the potential for that consciousness we can say, “It arises from this.” In this way the entities of distinguisher and basis distinguished are established, just as in everyday language one might say, “Please make some boiled rice,” or “Please weave a garment from this yarn.” This is explained in a treatise as well:’ ‘There are three that enter the womb, The cakravartin and the two self-manifest ones, ….’66 To explain how this is empty rhetorics: You may suggest that in the future it will be. But lacking in potential it cannot spring forth. Things that may occur at certain times can arise, but what is certain never to arise – such as a barren woman’s son or things such as space – will not. Thus in this context, if the potential did exist, consciousness could certainly come into being. But when the future consciousness does not exist, and its potential therefore doesn’t exist, as is the case for such things as a barren woman’s son, the absence of its potential means that it certainly can’t arise. This also applies when explaining boiled rice and so forth. And although it is indeed the case that consciousness and potential are mutually reliant, a thing that is dependent does not in fact have existence. Thus, And mutual dependence used to prove something, The wise will say this fails to prove establishment. (6.58) To say, ‘When consciousness exists, its potential is a fact; and consciousness arises from that,’ describes a case of mutual dependence. If they say, ‘That is exactly the way of things,’ they are effectively saying that consciousness does not inherently exist. For example, only when there is long can there be short, and when there is short can there be long; only when there is there can here exist, and when there is here can there exist. These are all nominal imputations lacking any intrinsic establishment. So if that is the case, they are in fact agreeing with us. As explained: A cause in the absence of an effect Has no existence as a cause. Hence, it necessarily follows That every effect is also a cause.67 And from the Treatise: If a thing is dependently established, And that upon which it depends Is established only in dependence on it, What is then established in dependence on what?68 Meaning that, if a thing such as consciousness were established in dependence on a particular potential, and that particular potential the consciousness relies on to establish its nature in turn depends on it; in establishing these two it must then be asked which is established in dependence on which? It continues: How can a dependently established entity Depend when it is not established? And if you say the established depends, Its dependence makes no sense.69 Meaning that, if consciousness is established in dependence on a potential, is it established or not as it depends on that potential? If it is not established it can’t rely on that potential, because it is as unestablished as the horns of a donkey. On the other hand, if it is established while depending, its establishment would mean that it cannot be dependent. The wise have thus stated that, ‘Things that are established in mutual dependence are not established.’ A future phenomenon cannot therefore have potential.
To explain that past potential likewise cannot be, it was said: If it comes from a ceased potential’s ripening, A separate potential then brings forth something. If it is so that, as a result of a produced consciousness having ceased a particular potential is left in the substrate consciousness, and through the ripening of this ceased consciousness’s potential a consciousness arises, this would be an instance of something other arising from an extraneous potential. How so? Because: As parts of a continuum must be distinct …, ‘Tan- means to extend’.70 Accordingly, a continuum (saṃtāna) implies a succession, like the continuum of a river, and means that there is a continuous flow, a continuous transmission, with a connection between cause and result. In its usage in the case of the succession of birth and death, there is a sense of a sustaining of the conditioned moments of the three times in a continuous and unbroken sequential state, and as the parts of this continuum exist in substantial instances, the branches of the continuum being instances of substance are what is spoken of as the continuity. These are mutually other and separate things, and our opponents accept their otherness. Hence, when caused by these imprints a latter resultant moment occurs, it is different from the causal moment during which the imprints were set in place, and as such this will be a case of something distinct coming from a separate potential. If they think, ‘This is what we assert, and it is unmistaken,’ that is not so. What one is in fact saying by this assertion is that anything can be produced from anything, as explained in the line: One could have everything come from just anything. (6.59) The refutation of other-production has already been covered, and will not be reiterated here.71
To this they reply: ‘The parts of a continuum are separate, But their continuum is an unbroken whole, Hence there’s no fault.’ … ‘The substantial moments of the sequence are indeed mutually distinct but the continuum is a singular thing, so it does not follow that everything can be produced from everything.’
If there was such a thing there would be no fault. But being unsubstantiated, … Well that will be a feat to prove: Why? Inseparable continua make little sense. (6.60) Possible means that something is feasible. It is not credible that mutually distinct existent identities constitute an inseparable continuum, because they are different, just like things that are separate. To show this, it was said: What makes for Upagupta’s and Maitreya’s traits Are different, and not part of one continuum. And when distinct things keep their separate character, It’s nonsense to believe they’re one continuum. (6.61) The idea is similar here: that a singular continuum does not hold up to reason. It was suggested that, ‘It is the fact of a potential ripening or not that determines whether there will be a consciousness of something or not, and not whether a knowable object is present or not.’72 This has hereby been refuted by explaining how potential is an impossibility; and we are therefore left with the position that, ‘Without a knowable object there can be no consciousness.’
Having given this explanation, the proponents of consciousness will still insist that their own presentation is sound, and say: ‘Promoted by its own potential there appears A ceaseless rising of the visual consciousness, And this potential which supports its consciousness Is taken as the physical eye faculty.’ (6.62) ‘An imprint of eye-consciousness is deposited in the substrate consciousness by another moment of consciousness, and as this later ripens, a consciousness with corresponding features is created. The uninterrupted instants of potential that have the uninterrupted potential to produce this consciousness, acting as its support, are what through ignorance is taken by the world to be the physical eye faculty; but there is in fact no eye faculty present apart from consciousness. The same applies to the other faculties.’
Thus, having explained how there is no eye-faculty apart from consciousness, they proceed to assert that material form is not something apart from consciousness either, saying: ‘But people cannot see that without outer forms These sense-produced cognitions clearly manifest As blue and such, originating from their seeds, Instead they take the mind to be external things.’ (6.63) ‘When the bandhujivaka73 and kiṅśuka flowers appear with a reddish hue, like gems they do not need to adopt their colour from something external. Nevertheless, the continua of sprouts and so forth are perceived as arising with their particular aspects in connection with the propelling potential of their own seeds. Similarly, colours such as blue appear as experiences of consciousnesses of blue and so forth without any external physical forms, and in relation to their appearance as blue and such, worldly people become convinced that they are external things. For example, say that on the branches of the trees surrounding a lake of clear water one were to hang red rubies (padmarāga) that would then be reflected in the water. Although there are external appearances of gems perceived in the water, it is not as if they are actually in there. This example may then be applied to consciousness. As such, there are no objects external to consciousness.’
‘Or, said differently: ‘The images in dreams are not external things But mind that is assuming shapes resulting from Potentials present. When awake it is the same: There’s nothing on the outside, just the thinking mind.’ (6.64)
That is not how it is. How so? If in the dream such blueness may present itself To mind even without the function of the eyes, Then why do these things not appear now to the blind From seeds that ripen though they cannot use their eyes? (6.65) Now, while we are awake, a clear visual consciousness comes about through the visual perception of forms. If this is exactly the same as what happens in a dream – and without the eyes being active the mental consciousness itself appears from the ripening of its imprint and takes on concordant features as an eye-consciousness – then why cannot a blind person see the same features when awake as someone who is not blind, when these are supposed to appear as such when their imprints ripen? In as much as the eyes are not operating, these two cases are exactly the same.
They might then think: ‘That the eye is inoperative is not the reason the mental consciousness appears in that manner; rather it is the ripening of a potential that mental consciousness has for those features. Hence, when that potential is ready to ripen, the mental consciousness appears with those features, but this only happens in dreams on the condition of sleep, and not while one is awake.’ This does not make sense. How so? And if you say it is when sleeping that the sixth’s Potential ripens, and not while one is awake, Then why not say that just as now it isn’t ripe, The sixth’s potential neither ripens in the dream? (6.66) Sixth refers to the mental consciousness. If words are all it takes to claim that the mental consciousness potential ripens in that manner in dreams but not in the waking state, then we might as well verbally claim that, just as in the waking state the consciousness potential does not ripen in that manner, it will likewise not ripen in dreams.
This enables us to say: For just as lack of eyesight cannot be its cause, When dreaming it is not the sleep that is the cause. Dream perceptions are, like the waking state of a blind person, a instance where an operative consciousness-supporting faculty is lacking, and therefore it is not so that a mental eye faculty named potential is there to act as a support for the features the mental faculty takes on as its mental faculty potential ripens. Thus, just as lacking eyes is not its cause for a waking blind man, neither should sleep be the cause for the ripening of imprints of consciousness in dreams. Therefore, since that is the case, We therefore grant that there are things as well as eyes That cause our false perceptions seen when in a dream. (6.67) Therefore one must accept that in dreams as well there are such objects that are known in such a such a way and there is such a support for the eye-consciousness.
As this is so, It seems that every counterargument they have Is nothing more than repetition of their claim. Their case is thus rejected – … It is shown that, this triad taking place in the waking state is empty of inherent existence, because it too is a perception, as in a dream. Our opponents then claim that, ‘Waking consciousness is empty of sense objects, because they are consciousness, like the experience of dream appearances;’ ‘The object apprehended while awake is by nature false, because it is an object, like dream objects;’ and also, ‘Without a dependent nature the thoroughly afflicted and fully purified states could not exist, because they would be as unfounded tortoise fur.’ They also use the example of cataracts to this effect. In these and other ways, the proponents of consciousness give various replies which the competent middle way proponent sees through as mere claims, the arguments of the proponents of consciousness are discredited. Being at odds with scripture and so forth, it is similarly inadmissible; since, … nowhere will one find The Buddha stating that there are existent things. (6.68) As stated: The threefold world is mere imputation, Not something essentially existent. Theoreticians, however, believe that This imputation is the essence of things.74 There is no nature, no cognition, There is no substrate, no entities; But the base and immature theoreticians, Like corpses, imagine these to be.75 To take entitylessness as the emptiness of one thing in another is senseless, as the scriptures also state: Mahāmati. The emptiness of one thing in another is the crudest form of emptiness.76 To this one may say, ‘That a cow does not exist because it is not a horse makes no sense, because they have their own identity,’ and so forth.
Likewise, O Illustrious One. They access the dharmadhātu by using their faculties. The twenty-two faculties are: the eye faculty, ear faculty, nose faculty, tongue faculty, body faculty, mind faculty, female faculty, male faculty, life force faculty, the faculty of happiness, faculty of suffering, faculty of pleasure, faculty of displeasure, faculty of neutrality, faculty of faith, faculty of diligence, faculty of attention, faculty of concentration, faculty of intelligence, the faculty of making the unknown known, the faculty of full knowing, and the faculty of possessing full knowledge. Regarding these, the eye faculty can’t ever be determined throughout the three times. Not being determinable throughout the three times, there is no such eye faculty. The eye faculty being non-existent, how can there be a conventionally designated eye faculty? It is similar to a hollow fist; a falsehood, inauthentic, there is nothing there.77 It may be nominally indicated, but ultimately neither hollow nor fist can be ascertained. The eye faculty is just like a hollow fist; a falsehood, nothing there, something inauthentic. A feigned, deceptive phenomenon that can fool a child. There is nothing there, it is inauthentic. It may, in the same way, be nominally indicated, but ultimately neither an eye nor a faculty can be observed. The Illustrious One gained the wisdom of omniscience and used the designation eye faculty in order to communicate with the many beings who remain perverted, but ultimately there is no such thing. The faculty is without inherent existence; it is devoid of facultyness. The eye does not exist as eyeness; the faculty does not exist as facultyness. How so? The eye does not have an eye nature; and a phenomenon that has no nature is not an existent thing. Not being an existent thing it is not established. It is unproduced and unceasing. It cannot be designated as something past or future. Illustrious One, it is just like someone having a dream where he is laughing, joyous and playing, who remembers this when waking up. Even though he is able to bring it to mind, it is not something that can be ascertained. How is that so? These things can’t even be found in the dream, not to mention when waking up – they are nowhere. The faculties are just like this dream; one cannot determine an essence to any phenomenon whatsoever. Hence they are said to be inexpressible.78 The aggregates, elements, sense fields, interdependence and so forth are all explained to be like the faculties. How could these ever then have any inherent nature? The proponents of consciousness who haven’t properly explored the intent of the Teacher’s words are therefore unable to apply their intelligence to good ends, and will surely be defeated.
‘But,’ they may say, ‘if in the absence of objects there is no consciousness, how can one then explain that yogis following their guru’s instructions perceive the ground completely covered in skeletons?’ When yogis train according to their guru’s words And see that skeletons are covering the earth, The three are still considered unproduced, because … … that is to say, the object, faculty and consciousness. Why? It is a meditative concentration: It’s guidance utilising false mind images. (6.69) The reason is that it is described as a mental exercise involving non-reality.
One must necessarily accept that this is the case. Otherwise, And if you think that these repulsive images Are just like any object that the mind conceives, When other people turn their minds towards such things They should discern them, and these wouldn’t then be false. (6.70) When you witness such things as a theatrical performance, among those who are watching, the image present to the eye consciousness of one will similarly be so also for others. If the present case was similar, then non-yogis should be able to perceive exactly the same images as the yogi when directing their gaze towards objects such as these skeletons, their being the same as consciousness of blue and so forth. This meditative concentration would then no longer be a mental application involving non-reality.
Similarly, one should understand that It’s similar to cataract-inflicted eyes When spirits see a river’s water being pus. It was previously explained that, ‘The mind sees hairs through the influence of this disease …,’79 and any other similar cases may be considered along the same lines; but we shall desist from elaborating more for now. In short, please understand that, just as what you know Has no existence, neither does the mind itself. (6.71) One should come to recognise that just as knowable objects have no inherent existence, the mind too that entertains images of knowable objects is in and of itself un-produced. As stated: Without a knowing there’s no known; And lacking that, no consciousness. Hence you declared that knowing and The known lack inherent existence.80 Similarly, Consciousness is like an illusion – Thus spoke The Sun’s Kinsman. And what it perceives is likewise Certainly like illusory things.81 Those who are seized by this consciousness-claiming madness82 and deny external objects, are sure to plunge into the ravine of self-hood, and must therefore be treated by noble compassionate practitioners with an excellent and harsh mantric cure of scripture and reasoning.
Thus, having shown how there cannot be consciousness without external objects, in order to reject the position that it simply must exist, it is said: And if detached from subject-object there could be Dependent nature, empty of duality, Then who would know of its existence? Just to say, ‘It’s there but not perceived,’ is quite unreasonable. (6.72) If a dependent nature empty of so-called apprehended and apprehender exists, through what cognition do you apprehend its existence? It is untenable that it apprehends itself, since it is contradictory for something to direct its act upon itself: the blade of a sword cannot cut itself; the tip of a finger cannot touch itself; even the strongest and most dextrous athlete isn’t able to climb onto his own shoulders; fire cannot burn itself; and an eye cannot look at itself. Another cognition cannot be apprehending it since that would conflict with your own tenets; if cognition was the object of another cognition, one could then say that this undermines the sense of cognition only. Hence there is no way whatsoever that there can be an apprehender of it; and that which cannot be apprehended cannot exist.
Now they reply, ‘It isn’t actually a case of another apprehending something else, but it has reflexive awareness. And since reflexive awareness apprehends itself, that shows it to be existent.’ To show how this can’t be, we explain: It isn’t proven to experience itself. It is unproven that it can so-called ‘apprehend itself.’ There are those who cite the Sautrāntika position in order to prove reflexive awareness: ‘When a fire is kindled it will simultaneously illumine itself together with vases and other things without distinction. And words signify both themselves and a referent. Similarly, when consciousness occurs it can fully discern itself and objects without distinction. Hence, reflexive awareness most certainly exists. ‘Though unwilling, one must by necessity accept reflexive awareness. Otherwise, when remembering the experience, “I saw …,” one wouldn’t then remember both the object as well as the experience, “I saw it.” Why? The memory would be of the experienced object, while the knowing of it would not have been experienced and could not then be remembered. ‘As long as awareness is not reflexive it cannot be experienced. And that there is another cognition experiencing it is unreasonable. Why? If the cognition experiencing it is other, the consequence will be that of infinite regress. If you accept that immediately following one cognition distinguishing the colour blue, there is a consciousness distinguishing that, one would need yet another experiencer of the cognition of the cognition of blue; and then yet another again; leading to the fault of infinite regress. ‘And it can’t be that cognition discerns something separate from it, since then all strings of awareness would be objects of distinct consciousnesses, and sentient beings only have a single stream of consciousness. It is like a stack of a hundred blue lotus-petals being pierced; consciousness engages with things in succession, but so rapidly that it appears to be happening simultaneously.83 Hence, to avoid the fault of infinite regress one must necessarily accept reflexive awareness. ‘With that, both objects involved when subsequently remembering the thought “I saw …” will be accounted for. But if the nature of cognition isn’t known by reflexive awareness, it’s illogical that its object can be remembered. And so, as the subsequent memory “I saw…” appears to one’s cognition, it may be inferred that the trigger for the cognitive experience of a subsequent memory containing both these objects must have been an experience of its own nature and the nature of the object. The subsequent memory proves the experience of oneself; and when experience of oneself exists, the dependent nature exists. You asked, “What would then know of its existence?”84 This is the answer.’ To show that this is illogical, it was said: It isn’t proven to experience itself. And if you say a later memory is proof, You’re giving something that is unproven as proof; And what’s not proven cannot function as a proof. (6.73) If this is the proof they now present to substantiate it, since memory is impossible in that it’s produced neither from self nor from other, how could the unproven memory prove the unproven reflexive awareness? Even in terms of worldly conventions it would be impossible for memory to be the result of reflexive awareness. How so? If, as in the case of fire, cognition is used to prove reflexive awareness – and because of its presence, like fire is deduced from smoke, one is to be convinced of its existence via the subsequent occurrence of memory – since this reflexive awareness remains something unproven, how could memory, the result of reflexive awareness and something that doesn’t occur if reflexive awareness doesn’t exist, exist? One can’t be certain of the presence of a water-crystal gem just from seeing water, or a fire-crystal gem just from seeing fire, because even without these water may be the result of such phenomena as rain, and fire may be produced for instance by rubbing sticks together. In the same way, this shows that memory may arise in the absence of reflexive awareness. And therefore, since memory as a result of reflexive awareness is non-existent without it, you’re giving something unproven as proof. In proving reflexive awareness, this unproven term ‘memory’ has no relevance as evidence – just like thinking of sound’s impermanence as something perceived by the eyes.
But say we dispense with such analysis: But let’s assume that self-awareness is affirmed. That memory remembers it is still unsound, Because it’s other, like an unknown in one’s mind. This argument will conquer any counterclaim. (6.74) If we do say that cognition is aware of itself and the object, it is still illogical for a remembering cognition to remember them, because the remembering cognition is accepted as other in relation to the cognition that experienced the object. The reflexive awareness and experience of the object that happened in Maitreya’s mind will not be remembered by Upagupta, because he didn’t experience them. Similarly, seeing as they are other, it would be just like an unknown mind appearing to oneself, and a subsequent consciousness taking place within a stream of mind cannot therefore have that memory, because it didn’t experience that cognition and object. Now, one may think that such a memory can exist, since this is a case of a single continuum where things have a causal relationship. But this too is not the case because we have an argument which defeats any objection. The argument of stating, ‘Since they are other …,’ will utterly defeat any counterclaims such as, ‘They are part of the same continuum,’ or, ‘They are in a causal relationship,’ and so on. Since a moment of recollecting cognition would come about subsequent to the experience, it is something other; and being in that way just the same as having a cognition of another stream of mind, we may say that it isn’t of a single continuum as the cognition that experienced, or in a causal relationship, and so forth. So this argument of stating that they are other is a sweeping refutation.
They might then ask, ‘How do you explain it?’ To clarify: For us, the one who has the memory is not Distinct from he who had experience of something. To think, ‘I saw,’ is therefore memory to us, As is the way conventional worldly people think. (6.75) I have already explained in relation to the experience of an object, how between the cognition that experienced the object and the cognition that remembers there cannot be otherness. And since, when there has been an experience, the rememberer is not another, it isn’t the case that the cognition which remembers that experience is not the experiencer, and the memory can therefore appear with the object. Since it isn’t the case that the discernment of the experiencing cognition isn’t the discernment of the rememberer, one can have the thought, ‘I saw….’ This is also the worldly viewpoint, which shouldn’t be subjected to rigorous analysis, since the conventions of the world operate on false premises.
This being the case: And so, as self-awareness cannot be the case, What is perceiving your dependent nature then? The actor, act and object cannot be the same, And thus to apprehend itself makes little sense. (6.76) An awareness thinking, ‘I cognise myself,’ implies that it itself is the thing acted upon, while the cognition, the actor, is also itself. And as its act is also not then separate, it follows that the actor, the acted upon and the act would be the same. These are however not seen to be the same, just like the wood-cutter, the wood and the act of cutting are not the same. Since reflexive awareness cannot therefore exist, it doesn’t apprehend itself. As stated in the Descent Onto Langka: Just as a sword does not cut Its own blade; and a fingertip Cannot touch itself; the same applies To the mind perceiving itself.85
Therefore, as reflexive awareness does not exist: If, even though it is by nature unproduced And isn’t known, dependent nature can exist, How has the barren woman’s son offended them That he should suffer this denial of being real? (6.77) As was demonstrated above, a dependent nature can be neither self- nor other-produced, and is likewise shown to be something that can’t be known. And if you do accept the existence of a dependent nature that is by nature unproduced and unknowable, why should you then not also accept the existence of things that have the same status as this dependent nature? Has the barren woman’s son harmed you in any way? A barren woman’s son too may be described as utterly unfathomable, an ineffable object of the noble ones’ wisdom86 , so you have to accept his existence!
If it is indeed an existent dependent nature which is, as they posit, ’… the cause for things that are but imputations…,’87 then logically: When this dependent nature can’t exist at all, Then how can it be causing relative events? The thinking being that a cause for the relative does not then exist in the slightest. And so, for them there is nothing that can actually cause worldly conventional reality. How terrible! When so obsessed with substance, our opponents will Just gainsay every normal worldly principle. (6.78) Foolishly clinging to one part of substantial reality is like pouring water into the unfired earthenware pot of the dependent nature. Due to their ignorant ways they find that they destroy everything: i.e. worldly principles that are only sound from the worldly perspective – commands such as sit!, go!, do!, cook! and so forth – as well as anything encompassed by material form, sensation and so forth. With that, nothing but failure lies ahead, and no good result will transpire.
And so, in their folly, these teachers insist on a path they themselves conceptually fabricate. But, There is no other method that will lead to peace Apart from noble master Nāgārjuna’s way. How so? Since, But they stray from the truths, the real and relative – One gains not liberation when ignoring these. (6.79)
And why will disregarding these two hinder liberation? To explain: Conventional truth works as a means to reach an end. The ultimate is like the end one tries to reach. But those who do not see how these should be discerned Are led by faulty fancies down mistaken paths. (6.80) As stated in the noble Absorption Revealing Reality: The knowers of the world themselves declared, And not by hearsay, that there are two truths: The relative and the ultimate. There is no such thing as a third truth. That beings may benefit from developing Faith in the bliss-gone ones, For beings’ sake the Victor taught The relative to aid the world. Relatively the Lion of Men would Identify six classes of beings: Hell-beings, animals and spirits, Demigods, humans and gods. You, so incomparable, taught about beings Of the world in all their distinctions: In terms of social rank, the high and low, As citizens, the rich and the poor, As slaves and servants, Men, women and neuters. The wise who have understood relative truth Teach in this way to aid the world. Cyclic beings drawn to these states Are driven by the eight concerns of beings: Gain and loss, fame and disrepute, Praise and blame, pleasure and pain. When success is gained attachment grows, While encountering loss upsets their minds; The rest may be similarly represented. These eight sicknesses cause constant harm. Do understand that their judgement is mistaken Who profess the relative to be the ultimate. Those who say the repulsive is appealing, Suffering is pleasure, who claim an inherent self Where there is no self, who say the impermanent Is permanent; they hold to signs who are thus inclined, And when learning of the doctrine of the Sugata They will fear it, and lacking understanding reject it. And those who reject the teachings of the Sugata Will suffer unbearably in the realms of hell. Immature children who unwisely pursue pleasure Will endure abundant sufferings. Only those who do not err, but understand The teachings that benefit the world, Can shed them like a worn-out serpent skin, Pass beyond existence and find peace. ‘All phenomena lack inherent existence, Are empty and signless – that is the ultimate.’ Those who hear this and rejoice, Will find the unsurpassed awakening.88 Victorious One, you who see the lack of skandhas, The absence of all elements and sense fields, That this house of faculties lacks all identity, O Sage, you see all things to be like this.89 So how can there ever be liberation for those separated from the relative and ultimate truths? Hence, these proponents of consciousness certainly stray, following mistaken pathways due to their erroneous ideas. To teach the conventional truth is a method. As stated: What is heard and what is taught Is the inexpressible dharma – Nothing expressed apart from superimpositions, But heard and taught nonetheless.90 Only by basing oneself on the conventional truth can the ultimate be taught. And by understanding the teachings on the ultimate, the ultimate state can be attained. As stated in the Treatise: Without relying on the conventional The ultimate cannot be indicated. Without relying on the ultimate Transcendence cannot be reached.91 To teach the ultimate is what the method aims to do, what it should result in; meaning that it is what is aimed for, the result, that to be attained, or what should be understood.
Here they might interject: ‘I won’t stand for any more of your discourteous talk! You display some skill in criticising others and have refuted the dependent nature through logical reasoning. But, in doing so you refute the very relative that you accept, as the arguments presented render it illogical.’ You’re like someone who feigns friendship and serves poisoned food to the person who has stolen all your wealth accumulated since beginningless time so that you can get it back. If this is how you prefer to avenge yourself we will relish it. That is excellent! As, The claims concerning the dependent you have made, I wouldn’t venture even for the relative. Although they don’t exist, pragmatically I say They do, in order to comply with worldly view. (6.81) For us the relative is not how you independently propose in your philosophical system that the dependent nature is something realised by the noble ones’ wisdom. How is it then? Although without existence, since the worldly consensus is that things exists, we will say so merely to express the viewpoint of the world, since agreeing with them becomes a remedial method. As stated: The Illustrious One said: The world may quarrel with me, but I have no quarrel with the world. I accept as existent whatever the world claims exists. I accept as without existence whatever the world claims does not exist.92
Concerning the relative: For arhats, who have left behind the aggregates And dwell in peace, these things do not indeed exist. If that was true for those who dwell within the world, I wouldn’t say that from the worldly view they do. (6.82) For the arhats who have entered the realm of transcendence with no remainder of aggregates, the relative does not essentially exist in any way whatsoever. If it was equally non-existent for worldly beings too, then just as with the aggregates of an arhat, I wouldn’t say that it exists from the worldly perspective. Therefore, it is in relation to others that I accept the relative, and not from my own side.
This is only what the worldly claim. And if what they hold must be refuted, then go ahead and refute them; direct it not at another. To express this: But if you think that they will be no match for you, Then go ahead and contradict the worldly view. So let the battle of the world and you commence, And after I shall follow who’s more powerful. (6.83) We would find it immensely difficult to refute the relative reality of the world. Still, you go ahead and refute the worldly relative! And if you are not defeated by the world I would have to support you. But the world will prevail, so I will remain neutral. Let the fight between you and the world commence; and if you are victorious we shall agree and follow your lead. But if the world defeats you, that will mean the world is the stronger and we shall follow them.
To this they object: ‘So, although unfounded, you accept the relative out of fear of the world’s disapproval. You should then also accept the position of mind-only so as not to be disproven by scripture and statements such as, “They think, ‘The three realms are mind only.’”’93 Let me explain. Failing to recognise the unique nature of the floor mosaic that is the collected sutras formed by the blue sapphire of the Sugata’s teachings, and thus mistaking it for water, you profess consciousness to be a real entity. Then, wishing to scoop up some of this water by asserting consciousness as a real entity, you attempt to rinse and fill the unfired earthen jar of your intellect causing it to shatter into a hundred pieces, and become the laughing stock of those who understand its nature. The intent of this sutra is not as you think. If you then wonder what it is, it was explained: In Present’s presence bodhisattvas realise The three realms to be nothing more than consciousness, And seeing that eternal makers are disproved, They understand the maker to be mind alone. (6.84) That same sutra elaborates on this point: … [they] consider in due order the steps of dependent origination. … ‘In this way this mass of suffering, this tree of suffering, manifests with neither creator nor experiencer.’ They think, ‘Because of clinging to a creator, acts are distinguished. Where there is no creator, no acts are ultimately perceived.’ They think, ‘The three realms are mind only. The twelve links of existence distinguished in the teachings of the Tathāgata are all based on a single mind.’94 As such, having refuted a permanent creator, they see that relatively it is simply the mind alone that is the creator, and realise the three realms to be merely consciousness. As for the meaning of the constituent words: Bodhi (awakening/enlightenment) refers to the wisdom of omniscience; and to be intent (sattva) on that, to have a wish for or consideration of it, is what is meant by bodhisattva. Alternatively, bodhisattva is to be guaranteed awakening (bodhi), to possess it, to be there. Or, bodhisattva may refer to an individual sentient being certain to awaken (bodhi). It is an abbreviation with the intermediate word omitted.95 Realise (paraiti) means to come to understand. Presence (abhimukha) implies that one is in the presence of the basic space of phenomena (dharmadhātu). Present (abhimukhī) is the name of the sixth ground.
Then, having clarified the meaning of this sutra, it is explained how this sense is also presented a futher sutra: And hence to fuel the insight of the clever ones, Make clear the meaning, the Omniscient One expressed These vajra-words in the Descent Onto Langka That shatter lofty mountains of misguided views. (6.85) The verse here indicated by the word these is the following: The person, continuum, aggregates, As well as conditions and particles, Primary principle and a creator god, These, I say, are mind alone.96 Such is the verse as extracted from the noble Descent Onto Langka.
To explain the meaning of this it is said: A maker, such as those we find described within The scriptures of the various misguided schools, A person or the like, he could not find – and so, The Victor said that mind alone creates the world. (6.86) The word misguided (tīrthya) is used generically, including also Buddhists who entertain concepts about a person and so forth. From one side these are not actually Buddhist, but are just like the misguided because they lack an unmistaken understanding of the teaching. This reference is therefore all-inclusive. As stated: Come! Ask the world, those who claim A person, aggregates – the Sāṃkhyas, The Aulūkyas97 , the Jains – if any profess Transcendence of being and nonbeing. See thus how the immortal teachings Of the buddhas, stating the profound, Beyond being and nonbeing, Is a dharma that is truly unique.98 Those who believe in aggregates and so forth may be identified as non-Buddhists. Respective systems (yathāsvam) refers to each of their different philosophies. Hence, this is describing how the misguided believe that such things as the aggregates are creators; and seeing as cyclic existence is beginningless, all sorts of conceptual ideas have already been or will be thought of. At present there are those such as the White Renunciates99 who do appear to be teaching about the aggregates and so forth. So, the meaning the sutra conveys is that the Tathāgata did not observe that a person or the like is the creator of things, and taught that mind alone creates the world.
We have now seen how the refutation of a separate creator is implicit, and explained how the word only cannot be used to refute knowable objects. To state in different words how this does not deny external things, it is said: Awakened indicates awakened to the truth. And likewise when the sutras speak of only mind It means that mind alone is foremost for the world. Denying matter never was the sutra’s goal. (6.87) Just as we use the term awakened (buddha) as an abbreviation of the expression awakened to reality (buddhatattva), one should understand that the same is the case when saying that the three realms are mind-only (cittamātra), implying that mind alone is primary (cittamātrapradhāna), and negating that anything else is of prime importance. This therefore demotes physical form from the primary role, but is not a refutation of its existence, saying that mind alone exists and that matter is nonexistent.
Thus one must necessarily accept the intent of the sutra to be is as we have explained it. But, considering your tradition: If mind alone in fact was meant to indicate Denial of the physical reality, Then why indeed was mind too by the Mighty One Described to be from karma and confusion born? (6.88) The noble Ten Grounds Sutra states that consciousness is caused by confusion and formations, and not that it is intrinsically existent. A consciousness established in and of itself wouldn’t be subject to ignorance or formations; however, it does in fact rely on them. There is therefore no such thing as an inherently existent consciousness. Just as the perception of hairs for one with cataracts, it exists when a distorting condition is present, and not when such a distorting condition is absent. As stated: Thus the bodhisattvas consider in due order the steps of dependent origination. They think, ‘Not knowing the truths there is ignorance of the ultimate truth. The karma of ignorance ripens as mental formations. The initial mind based on these mental formations is consciousness. The four aggregates subject to grasping arising together with consciousness are name and form. The development of name and form leads to the six sense fields. The defilement that results from the meeting of faculty, object and consciousness is contact. With contact there is feeling. Attachment to feeling is craving. As craving proliferates there is grasping. The defiled karma resulting from grasping is becoming. The result of becoming is birth, and the emergence of the aggregates. As the aggregates develop there is ageing. With ageing the aggregates deteriorate and there is death. The intense agony of shock and longing that accompanies death is grief. The wailing that accompanies grief is lament. Its effect on the five faculties is suffering. Its effect on one’s mental outlook is despair. Great suffering and despair ends in torment. In this way this mass of suffering, this tree of suffering, manifests without a creator, without an experiencer.’100 ‘Ignorance produces two effects: it distorts what sentient beings observe, and provides a cause for mental formations to manifest. Mental formations likewise produce two effects: they make future ripening results manifest, and provide a cause for consciousness to manifest. Consciousness produces two effects: it creates a link to the continuity of existence, and provides a cause for name and form to manifest. Name and form produce two effects: they mutually support each other, and provide a cause for the six sense fields to manifest. The six sense fields produce two effects: they display their respective spheres of activity, and provide a cause for contact to manifest. Contact produces two effects: it provides contact with the object, and provides a cause for feeling to manifest. Feeling produces two effects: it creates experiences that are pleasant, unpleasant and neither of these, and provides a cause for craving to manifest. Craving produces two effects: it makes one desire desirable things, and provides a cause for grasping to manifest. Grasping produces two effects: as above,101 and it provides a cause for becoming to manifest. Becoming produces two effects: it creates a basis for further types of existence, and provides a cause for birth to manifest. Birth produces two effects: as above,102 and it provides a cause for ageing to manifest. Ageing produces two effects: it causes the decline of the faculties, and provides a cause for one’s encounter with death to manifest. And death produces two effects: it causes the destruction of the compounded, and provides and cause for misapprehension to continue without interruption.’103 As these and similar statements make clear, consciousness is taught to be caused by ignorance and mental formations. Thus, when corrupting conditions are present, consciousness comes into being. In what manner is it then absent when they are absent? This is elaborated upon: ‘As ignorance ceases mental formations cease,’ means that when the condition of ignorance is absent mental formations are stilled and do not persist. ‘As mental formations cease consciousness ceases,’ means that when the condition of mental formations is absent consciousness is stilled and does not persist. …104 This continues up until: … They think, ‘When things combine formations increase. When things are separate formations do not increase. When things amass formations increase. When things do not amass they do not increase. We have in this way seen the many adversities that accompany conditioned phenomena, and shall sever this process of combining, this amassing; but shall forsake attaining the ultimate pacification of all that is conditioned in order that we may bring sentient beings to maturity.’ O royal sons. As they, in this way, consider how this conditioning is riddled with adversity, lacks intrinsic essence, is unarisen and unceasing …,105 This being the case, who in their right mind would, on seeing the scriptural statements presented here, conclude that consciousness has substantial existence? Making that assumption is based purely on belief.
Therefore, when saying mind-only, what is emphasised is that mind alone is primary, and this scripture is not at all implying that there is no physical form. And to indicate how it is mind that is primary, it is said: It truly is the mind that makes the spectacle That is the worlds of beings and environments. It’s stated that all beings’ states are karma-born – Dispense with mind and there will be karma no more. (6.89) Here, the world of beings refers to the individual states of existence sentient beings meet with due to their karma and afflictions. The world of the vessel refers to everything from the wind-maṇḍala up to the celestial realm of Akaniṣṭha produced by their shared karma. The variegated facets of such things as the patterns on a peacock’s feathers are produced from the particular karma of that peacock. The varieties of such things as lotus flowers are produced from the shared karma of all sentient beings. Take this to apply to all things in general. As stated: Just as when one is born on Mount Black, It is their karma that decides whether A being is in hell or realms divine, If trees will be of weapons or of gems.106 Since this is the case, all states of existence arise from karma and karma again is dependent on mind, the reason for this being that it is only sentient life that can accumulate karma, and without mind there is no karma.
It is therefore the mind that is the primary cause for entering the states of existence, not anything else. This is why the sutras posit that mind alone is primary and not physical form. Why? Though matter is a fact, it can’t claim to possess The same creative power that the mind displays. The thinking being that physical form is an inanimate substance. A maker other than the mind is thus denied, But that is not to say that matter is disproved. (6.90) Some claim that such things as the primary principle (pradhāna) is the creator. Some claim that it is the mind. But there is no disagreement about the fact that material form cannot be the creator. Therefore, in order to disprove their belief in such identities as the primary principle as creator, the creative ability that mind alone exhibits is said to be the creator. The justification for saying this is that, as one has then disproved that such things as the primary principle can be the creator, one annihilates the topic of the debate. It is like eliminating one of two opposing kings both vying for control of a country, thus leading one of them to gain domination of the country and leaving the populace unharmed, which is important to both. Here too, for the benefit of both, material form is never denied, so that one may still retain the idea that there is material form.
Since that is what these words communicate: It is the worldly fact that aggregates are five While one is placed within the world’s reality. But when the wisdom of reality they seek Has dawned, for yogis these will no longer appear. (6.91) And since this is the case:
If form is absent don’t assume the mind is real. And don’t insist that form is there without the mind. When reasoning shows that form does not exist, since the existence of either of them is then untenable one must concede that mind too can’t exist. And, when mind is understood to exist, form should be likewise accepted since both are confirmed by worldly consensus.This may also be seen from the scriptures: The Buddha would reject them equally within The wisdom texts – in abhidharma both were taught. (6.92) The aggregates of form and so forth were all five equally taught in the Abhidharma, through distinctions such as their unique as well as shared defining characteristics. And in the Perfection of Intelligence all five of them were equally refuted in statements such as, ‘Subhūti. Form is inherently empty…,’ until, ‘Consciousness ….’
With this it has been proven by scripture and reasoning that: Dismiss the tiered system of the dual truth, Your substance is then barred and cannot be maintained. To claim that, ‘form does not exist, there is only consciousness,’ is to disregard the tiered levels of the relative and ultimate as has been explained. And while disregarding the levels of these truths, your substantial existence still remains unproven. What does this mean? Since substantial existence has previously been refuted, you exert yourself to no avail. Acknowledge thus that there are levels to the truth: Birth in the world but never in reality. (6.93)
Here they reply: ‘One may well explain the intent of this sutra in that particular way, but there are certainly other sutras where we also find that only mind exists. As stated: ‘Without external appearances The mind appears in various ways, Like bodies, possessions and abodes – I teach that these are only mind.107 ‘Here, bodies refer to the sense fields of the eye and so forth. Possessions refer to objects, such as forms and so forth. Abodes refer to the world of the vessel. Since nothing exists externally separate from mind, it is only consciousness that appears in the form of bodies, possessions and abodes, and these are taken to be external objectively existent things separate from consciousness. Hence, the three realms are mind only.’ The statements of this sutra are also given with intentional ambiguity. To explain: The sutras where it states that what we see is not External, but the mind perceived in various ways, There was an intention behind this, in that That was provisional, taught to invalidate The physical for those who are attached to form. (6.94) This provisional meaning teaching is aimed at those with great yearning for material things, who due to that lose their free will through being overcome by desire, anger, pride and so forth. Their obsession with these things leads to much negativity which in turn destroys the merit and wisdom they have developed. To overcome afflictions caused by material things, the Illustrious One would thus teach such ones that things are only mind, in the same way that he would teach about the skeletons that are not in fact there to desirous individuals in order to overcome desire for external objects.
‘How can one be certain that this is a provisional meaning and not the definitive meaning?’ Based on scripture and reasoning. And in order to show this it was said: The Teacher did express it as provisional. Provisionality is shown by reasoning. It is not only this sutra that is provisional in meaning, but others as well: This scripture makes it clear that other sutras too Of similar sort will likewise be the leading truth. (6.95) And which sutras are of a similar kind? When presenting the three natures – the imputed, the dependent and the thoroughly established – the Unraveling the Intent Sutra108 states that the imputed is nonexistent, the dependent is existent […], and likewise presents statements such as: Deep and subtle is the carrying consciousness, Like a river’s current, a flow of every seed. Since it would be wrong to think of it as the self, I do not teach it to the immature.109 As stated: Like a doctor will prescribe medicine According to various needs of patients, In the same way the Buddha taught To beings that there is only mind.110 These scriptural quotes make it clear that this is provisional in meaning. Similarly, […]: In the sutras mention is made by the Illustrious One of the tathāgata nature. The Illustrious One describes it as present within the bodies of all sentient beings, a natural pure perfection, primordially unsullied and endowed with the thirty-two marks of excellence. The Illustrious One says that it is like a precious jewel that is wrapped in filthy garments, wrapped in the garments of aggregates, elements and sense fields, held back by attachment, aversion and confusion, sullied by the taints of misconceptions, something permanent, lasting and unchangeable. How is this tathāgata nature the Illustrious Tathāgata speaks of not the same as the ātman taught by the misguided? Illustrious One, the misguided also describe the ātman as permanent, uncreative, without properties, pervasive and indestructible. The Illustrious One replied: No, Mahāmati. When I teach the tathāgata nature, it is not the same as the ātman propounded by the misguided. Mahāmati, the tathāgatas, arhats, truly complete buddhas teach emptiness, the ultimate end, transcendence, the unborn, featureless, wishless and so forth as the tathāgata nature. The tathāgata nature is used to indicate the unapparent state of non-conceptuality so that immature beings may lay aside their fear of selflessness. O Mahāmati, the future and present bodhisattvas, great beings, would not maintain belief in a self. Take as example, Mahāmati, the potter who by using his hands, craftsmanship, tools, water, cord and perseverance can make pots of various shapes from a single lump of clay. In the same manner, Mahāmati, the tathāgatas may teach the lack of self of phenomena, the reversal of all conceptual characteristics, in various modes using intelligence and skilful means such as tathāgata nature or selflessness when suitable. In a way similar to the potter, they teach using all manners of terms and expressions. This is why, Mahāmati, the teaching on the tathāgata nature is not like the ātman taught by the misguided. Through teaching the tathāgata nature, Mahāmati, the tathāgatas may provisionally lead the misguided who cling to their teachings on the ātman. Thus they teach the tathāgata nature. It is how those who have ended up with ways of thinking that conceptualise a real self may gain the perspective that can accommodate the three liberations, and thus swiftly realise unsurpassable true and complete awakening.111 As it also teaches: Mahāmati. The features of emptiness, non-arising, non-duality and lack of inherent nature are found in the sutras of all buddhas.112
It has thus been made abundantly clear through this citation that sutras of this type that the proponents of consciousness take as definitive in meaning are in fact all provisional in meaning. To explain how reasoning will also show them to be provisional in meaning: The buddhas taught that when there is no object known The knowing of it will be easy to refute. The known is therefore what’s initially denied, Because without the known the knowing is disproved. (6.96) The illustrious buddhas introduce students in stages to the lack of inherence. Meritorious activity makes it easier for one to access the true state of things (dharmatā), and the teachings on generosity and so forth are therefore given first, as a skilful method for accessing the true state. Refuting the known is similarly a skilful way of coming to understand selflessness, and the illustrious ones therefore present the refutation of knowable objects initially, since those who understand the selflessness of the known object will find it easy to relate to the selflessness of the knower. In some cases, those who have understood how knowable objects have no inherent nature, will gain the realisation of the knower’s lack of an inherent nature by themselves. In some cases they will need some guidance. The refutation of knowable objects is therefore taught first.
To encourage intelligent individuals to identify other texts in a similar fashion, it is said: And thus you should discern the level of the text: When what is being explained is not reality But leads one, then the sutra is provisional; It is definitive if voidness is the theme. (6.97) Sutras which do not explicitly express interdependent origination through such particular attributes as non-arising and so forth, may be described as aids that help one approach the lack of inherent nature, as when it states: To counteract attachment to form You taught about form, saying ‘If the eyes do not apprehend the elements, How can they apprehend what they give rise to?’113 And from a sutra: Impermanence means non-existence.114 While they are definitive if the topic matter is emptiness, as found in statements such as the following: Know that sutras where the Sugata explains Emptiness are classed as definitive in meaning, While dharmas where he teaches beings, individuals And persons are all provisional in meaning.115 And, All the sutras that I have taught In the many thousands of realms Are identical in meaning though the words differ, But cannot be fully reiterated. Through contemplating a single item One will be practicing all. Of all the many dharmas Expressed by the myriad buddhas, Every dharma relates selflessness. And if anyone skilled in the meaning Of things studies this point, The qualities of Buddha will not be hard to find.116 Similar and more extensive presentations on this matter may be found in various sutras such as the noble Akṣayamati.117 To present one stance on this: The snake is an imputation upon the interdependence of a coiled rope, because it isn’t actually there. A real snake is thoroughly established because it is not an imputation. As in this example, inherent nature is an imputation on what is dependently created. And as we find stated: Inherent natures cannot be fabricated And do not depend on anything else.118 Hence, inherent essences cannot be created. The apprehended and reflection-like interdependence which is imputed on is the actual fact from the perspective of the buddhas, since it is then no longer an imputation. Directly perceiving the nature itself, without reference to created entities, they realise the actual reality, and are therefore called buddhas.119 Such an understanding of the three natures – the imputed, the dependent and the thoroughly established – as presented here, helps explain the intention of the sutras. When the duality of apprehended and apprehender does not have a reality beyond the dependent nature, it should be considered whether these two can in fact be imputed on the dependent nature. But this digression shall end here, and we now return to the main subject matter.
Having thus also refuted production from other, now in relation to the refutation of production from both, it was said: That things arise from both will not be reasonable, Because one will encounter faults explained above. For the Possibilists (syādvādika), production takes place both from self and other, meaning that they believe in production from both. A pot, they say, comes about through factors such as a lump of clay, a stick, a potter’s wheel, string, water, the potter and so forth. Since the clay and the pot aren’t separate things, the pot produced exists in the nature of the clay, hence self-production. Since such things as the work of the potter involved in its production are distinct from it, there is other-production. This is the idea underlying their belief in both self- and other-production. And just as with the external environment, individual creatures also come about from self and other. In this regard they present a list of principles: ‘There are nine principles involved in this: life-force, inanimate factors, merit, negativity, defilements, vows and so forth.’ Given that Maitreya’s future birth exists in the nature of his life-force, there is self-production, because Maitreya and his life-force are not separate things. Life-force is a component of migratory existence, and these opponents therefore assert that it is a cause for existences such as that of a god. Since one’s birth takes place through external factors such as one’s father and mother, religious ways or lack thereof, defilements and so forth, there is other-production. ‘Hence,’ they say, ‘we are not affected by the statement, “There is no production from self, nor is there production from other,” because we propose that there is neither exclusively self-production nor other-production.’ This is not a reasonable argument, as explained: Production from both is likewise unjustified. Why? Since it would involve the faults already mentioned. Because holding the position of both involves the faults already pointed out for both positions, production from both is not possible. Because the pot exists in the nature of the clay there is no production, since it already exists. As has been explained: If it came from itself there would be nothing gained. What is produced, produced once more – that makes no sense.120 Similarly, it should be acknowledged that as he already exists by nature of his life-force, Maitreya isn’t then born. Because the pot is not present in the identity of the water, string, wheel and so forth, it cannot be produced from them. As has been explained: If it were possible that something else could be produced Based on what’s other, utter darkness should emerge from flames; And one would see production of all things from everything, Since in their difference every non-producer is the same.121 The case of Maitreya arising from what is other, such as his father and mother, may be explained in the same manner. Just as it was previously shown how production from self and from other is untenable in the worldly relative and ultimately, to now conclude the above treatment that showed that the reasoning presented by the Syādvādikas does not work it was said: Not in the world nor actually can this be claimed ... To express that, we do not merely allude to the reasons presented above that show how production from both is untenable, but will explain so here as well, it was said: When by each one production cannot be sustained. (6.98) For example, since a single sesame seed may yield oil, many of them will as well, while this is not the case for sand where such a capacity is not observed. Likewise, it is when productive ability is there for individual members that a collection of such things will have it too. Hence, production from both is unreasonable.
The Substantivists (svabhāvavāda)122 will say, ‘With causal production, the cause and effect must either be the same, different or both, and then one will run into those problems. But if I do not assert a cause, those problems will not be an issue. Hence, it is in fact the case that things arise by themselves. We do not observe anything that deliberately makes the roughness and smoothness of the fibres and petals of the lotus flower; nor do we observe anything that makes the various colours and shapes of the petals, stamens and pistils. The same is the case for breadfruit, pomegranate and so forth. And just as with these things that are part of the environment, we do not observe anything that intentionally designs the colours, shapes and so forth of lifeforms such as peacocks, partridges and cranes. The fact therefore, is that production of things happens naturally.’ To comment on this: If causelessly production could in fact take place, Then endless things would always come from everything. And people of the world would not in all these ways Be planting seeds and so forth to make crops appear. (6.99) If things could arise spontaneously, just as the breadfruit tree wouldn’t then be the cause of breadfruit, all other sorts of things that are not its cause could also produce it – neem, mango and so forth – since they would all equally be non-causes. Just as breadfruit could be found on trees that aren’t its cause, it could also emerge from anywhere in the three realms. And, even though fruits such as mango and breadfruit123 are seasonal, appearing only at certain times, they would then be perennial, not being reliant on seasons. Similarly, since peacocks wouldn’t be the cause of peacock feathers, crows would also have peacock feathers; and even at the embryonic stage, peacocks would always have parrot feathers. Every being would in this way perpetually come into being, but this is clearly not the case – so to assert naturalness makes no sense. Having shown how it contradicts reason, to further explain how it contradicts what we can observe it says, ‘… and people of the world wouldn’t then be preparing all these things, like seeds, to make their crops appear.’ This demonstrates that production doesn’t happen naturally.
Furthermore, If living were devoid of causes one would not Perceive more than the sky-lotus’s scent and hue. But since the dazzling beauty of the world is seen, Just like one’s mind the world arises causally. (6.100) If lifeforms were devoid of causality, one wouldn’t come to have perceptions any more than one does of the scent and colour of a blue lotus in space, but one does. And therefore you should acknowledge that just as with the workings of mind, every state of being is causally arisen. According to you, a mental impression of the colour blue will not occur if one removes the blue object. And since the mental impression of blue is only there with the presence of blueness, and not by itself, this invalidates the claim of naturalness.
Those who believe that mind originates from the elements124 think, ‘Causes are evident and cannot be denied, because we do see them, and because of the faults you have mentioned. The causal relationships between things is a fact commonly accepted in the world. There are only four things that are real: earth, water, fire and wind, and these form the basis for the endless variety within the world. Not only is it the case that a particular synthesis of these leads to the varieties of lotus, pomegranate and so forth, and species such as peacock and crane, that we can observe; sentience and the ability to distinguish between the various types of things also originate with them. Just as when particular elements combine and develop, producing the intoxicating capacity of alcohol that causes beings to experience intoxication and stupefaction, so it is that certain combinations of the major elements developing from the embryonic stage oblong (kalana) give rise to consciousness and eventually the ability to distinguish between all manner of things. All the things that make up the environment and the living beings therefore develop from within this world, and there is nothing that is now the outcome of karmic acts, nor will the actions of this life have an effect in future lives after one dies.’ My dear, let us enjoy ourselves and eat. What is past will not haunt you, my beauty. This body is but a gathering of things, O timid girl, what is gone will not return.125 Desiring to have sex with his daughter he spoke thus to convince her that there are no future lives. To address this: How can you be so certain that there are no other lives? If they say, ‘Because they can’t be directly perceived,’ is the fact that you don’t have direct perception of other lives something you directly perceive, or not? ‘I directly perceive it.’ Well, if you directly perceive that there is no direct perception of other lives, that would mean that non-existent things can also be directly perceived. And then, non-existent things would be existent for you because they are directly perceived in exactly the same way as existent things. In that case there would be nothing that could be labeled non-existent. And without their opposite, existent things likewise cannot exist. And when there are neither existent things nor non-existent things, that undermines the existence of elements and non-existence of future lives. If they say, ‘It is not directly perceived;’ something that is not directly perceived cannot be apprehended precisely because it is not directly perceived. And how could failing to apprehend be a valid way to infer the non-existence of future lives? They then suggest, ‘It is apprehended through inference.’ But in regard to using inference as a valid way of proving things, you have made the claim: There is nothing more to man Than what our senses reveal. What the learned say, dear girl, Is nothing but a wolf’s trail.126 Therefore, if you keep on denying everything, I can use the same approach used when rejecting that mind comes from the elements to entirely reject this too. Furthermore, someone with a visual impairment who thinks that there are such things as two moons when in fact there are not, will also mistakenly see other things that aren’t really there, such as hair strands, bees and so forth. Similarly, when thinking that future lives and the like do not exist, because you have a perverted understanding, you will likewise be mistaken about other things that you see. To express this it was said: If it’s the nature of the elements that make Your mental image though its nature it does lack, How could someone so densely dimmed towards this life Be trusted to have knowledge of the lives beyond? (6.101) How can these four that you talk of, that are of the nature of earth and so forth, become objects of your mind without sharing its nature? Having such a flawed way of seeing this world, how could you possibly have any understanding of that which is beyond this world, a sphere of knowledge requiring exceptionally subtle divine vision?
Furthermore, When you deny that there are lives beyond this one, Your view of how things are is flawed since such views have This bodily existence as their common ground, Like when you make the claim that elements are real. (6.102) Common (sama) means that there is a similarity of kind. Ground (āśraya) means that it underlies it.127 Body (mūrti) refers to corporeality. Such views implies this particular view that rejects past and future lives. Since it describes it as being a common ground, this is a specifying compound. Bodily existence is the common ground, and the phrase is thus combined as such views have this bodily existence as their common ground. A matup-affix is used to give the sense of in whom it is.128 That then becomes, since such views have this bodily existence as their common ground, supplying the reason.129 Concerning this ground, as long as the mind is thought to be generated from the elements and no room is left for the possibility of past and future lives, there is a common ground for this mistaken view of denying past and future lives and when thinking that the elements are really existent, and the common ground for these types of views of the materialist is this bodily existence. There are thus two contexts here: one being their understanding of the natural elements, and the other their denial of past and future lives. Here in the verse, one of these indicates their stance and the other serves as an example, when it says, like when you make the claim that elements are real; in that context as well, it is physical reality which is the common ground for their view, and this view of how knowable things are is flawed.
They might think, ‘There is nothing wrong in the way I see things when understanding the natural existence of the elements; so the example that you use in your proof is void.’ That is not so, since the fact that they are unproduced shows that it is a mistaken view to think that these elements, being in nature non-existent, can have any sense of production or existence. If they say that we would need to prove that the elements are in fact unproduced, we don’t, because it has already been proven. To express this: It has been shown how elements cannot exist, As it was generally disproved things can’t arise From self, other, both, or without a cause; and so Though not explicit, they have no reality. (6.103) It has been commonly refuted that existent things can be produced from self, other, both or causelessly, and since this general refutation showing that there is no production also applies to production with respect to the elements, they have no inherent existence and the example is therefore valid. This likewise applies to those who variously refute the Omniscient One, who propound that entities exist, who propound that entities do not exist, who propound an almighty god, time, particles, primordial nature or inherence, or anyone else. One may in these cases adapt the verse accordingly, for example: When you deny that the Perfect Buddha exists, Your view of how things are is flawed since such views have This bodily existence as their common ground, Like when you make the claim that elements are real.130 This will serve to refute all views that hold on to any form of existence or non-existence. Nothing unwanted can ever befall us, so by skilfully altering this verse we are certain to eliminate each and every position our opponents may formulate, thus halting the entire web of conception and making the ultimate wisdom manifest. They might then think, ‘You are equally affected by this consequence.’ But we are not, because there is no example that shows our proof to be mistaken. We may say: When I acknowledge there are lives beyond this one, My view of how this are is accurate since such views have This bodily existence as a common ground, Like when I claim the understanding of selflessness. Likewise, When I say that the Omniscient One exists at present, My view of how things are is accurate since such views have…, The reason and example are the same two; and this may likewise be applied in connection with all things. With this approach, whatever the thesis may be it remains valid that: It can’t come from itself, and how from other things? Can’t come from both, how could it be without a cause?131
One may ask, ‘If things are neither produced from self, other, both, nor causelessly, how are they then produced?’ To explain: If things had any sort of inherent existence, no other type of arising could be conceived of, and one would undoubtedly have to observe that they arose either from self, other, both, or causelessly. Some might propose that things are produced from a creator god or the like, but in those cases too, such things as a creator god would be a self, an other, or both; so those propounding such things as a god to be the cause, will not therefore avoid the problems already presented. Hence, no fifth cause of production can be imagined. To express how, in the absence of any other alternative, and since production by any of these four conceivable options has been refuted, there is no inherent production of things, it was said: Because things don’t arise from self, other or both, Nor causelessly, they’re nothing in and of themselves. One might then ask, ‘If things are indeed without inherent arising, how do we then apprehend the unarisen, such as the colour blue?’ To explain: Since there is no way that a true nature of blueness and so forth could be objectified, the nature of things such as blue is not apprehended. ‘If that is the case, what are these things which keep appearing as actual objects to our perception?’ To explain: the mistaken is not the actual nature – true identities are only perceived by the ignorant and not by those free from ignorance. To express this: The clouds of dense confusion lie across the world, And therefore objects are perceived mistakenly. (6.104) By clouds amassing rain-clouds are meant. Since thick ignorance, similar to a layer of clouds, blocks the perception of the nature of blueness and so forth, immature beings cannot perceive the true nature of blue. They make the mistake of thinking that it has essential nature, and with this belief the immature perceive it to be real.
They interject: ‘With the actual reality not being in any way seen since it is blocked by ignorance, how does this mistaken perception then come about?’ To show by means of external examples how things are experienced as real in this way despite this not actually being the case, it was said: An eye disease may cause mistaken visions like Hairs, double moons, the peacock eyes, bees and so forth. Just as in instances when things are taken to be real when in fact not really there, such as when cataracts lead the afflicted to perceive hairs and so forth…, The unwise, tricked by their confusion, will likewise Believe the sundry fashioned imagery they see. (6.105) The Illustrious One has stated that: Confusion leads to formations.132 That: A person affected by ignorance generates meritorious formations, non-meritorious formations and unwavering formations.133 And likewise that: When ignorance is halted formations cease.134
Accordingly, It is a sign of witlessness if one declares, ‘Confusion causes karma; does not come without.’ Just like the sun of wisdom sheds the nightly gloom, The wise unravel emptiness and are set free. (6.106) When seeing the statement, ‘Confusion leads to formations,’135 the judicious not only come to appreciate that formations lack inherent existence. Due to their understanding they also rid themselves of ignorance and stop perpetuating conditioned phenomena, having abandoned the causes for their perpetuation. Thus they are freed from cyclic existence.
They now object, ‘If form and so forth ultimately have no inherent nature whatsoever, then they are just like the son of a barren woman in having no ultimate existence, which means that relatively too they wouldn’t have any inherent nature. But form and so forth do have a relative nature. Therefore, seeing as they have such an existence, they must then have ultimate existence.’ ‘If in reality things don’t in fact exist, They’re like a barren woman’s son and should like him Have no existence also as conventional things. They must therefore exist as things inherently.’ (6.107)
We reply: Take objects such as hairs, although they are not there, Do still appear to someone who has cataracts. Thus, first of all, please settle your dispute with them. And then go deal with those impaired by ignorance. (6.108) First you should then take your arguments to those who have defective eyesight, such as those suffering from cataracts, and ask them, ‘Why is it that you see such non-existent things as strands of hair, but not the son of a barren woman?’ And then you should question those whose mind’s eye is veiled by the cataracts of ignorance, asking them, ‘Why is it that you see forms that are by nature unarisen, but not the son of a barren woman?’ I am not the one to be censured here. I am quoting the scriptures: ‘that yogis see things in this way, and that others who wish to gain the wisdom of the yogis should pay attention to the way in which they explain the nature of things.’136 It is through realisation, brought about by yogic wisdom, that entities may be explained as lacking inherent nature. This is not something taken from my own understanding, since my mind’s eye is veiled by the cataracts of ignorance. But as is stated: Devoid of nature, the aggregates are emptiness. Devoid of nature, awakening is emptiness. Anything engaged in is empty by nature. The wise understand this, the immature do not. With the nature of insight seen to be empty, The nature of the known seen to be empty, The knower as well is thus understood; This is called practicing the path of awakening.137 And the yogis are therefore not the ones to be censured; they are the ones who see that no phenomena have inherent nature, either relatively or ultimately.
So stop censuring the cataract-ridden! First of all take a closer look at yourself. To explain: In fact you too see things that are not really there, The city of gandharvas, images in dreams, Illusions, a mirage, reflections and so forth. So, is it not unsound how these appear to you? (6.109) To take dream perceptions as an example, they are just as non-existent as the son of a barren woman. Still, one can experience a dream but not the son of a barren woman. It is the same with the city of gandharvas.138 A mirage refers to the phenomena of water appearing in a mirage. The same is the case for illusions. When saying reflections and so forth, the phrase and so forth is meant to include such things as echoes and apparitions. And although everything in these examples is empty of inherent existence, they can be seen; but the son of a barren woman cannot. So you should in fact be censuring yourself. And only after that should you come criticising me.
We may well then say: Though actually these are as unborn as The barren woman’s son, that does not mean That these things are not seen within the world. It’s therefore not conclusive what you say. (6.110) As the Illustrious One has stated: Beings are explained to be like dreams, And not considered real in actual fact. Nothing appearing in a dream is real, But people misconstruing still believe. The city of gandharvas may appear, But there is no such city anywhere. Just as its city status is but a name, The Sugata sees beings in the same way.139 Though to the observer there is water, No water can be found in a mirage. Just so for those confused by their ideas The unappealing is considered fair.140 O Druma, though it has no true nature, Within a spotless mirror Reflections may still appear – You should understand phenomena thus.141 So as this scriptural quote makes clear, even though a true nature has not arisen, material forms and so forth are perceptible objects to worldly people, while the son of a barren woman is not, and your argument is therefore inconclusive.
We are not affected by this argument; we do not assert that forms and so forth are inherently produced on the conventional level whilst refuting them ultimately. How so? Since just as A barren woman’s son cannot in fact be born By worldly standards or in true reality. It is the same with anything, they don’t occur As true things in reality nor in the world. (6.111)
This being the case, The Teacher thus proclaimed that all phenomena Are peace from the beginning, free from any birth, Complete transcendence142 of a nature that is real, Which means that there is never any birth of things. (6.112) And seeing as we have such scriptural statements, this means that there is never any production taking place. As a scripture states: When turning the Wheel of Dharma You teach that all phenomena Are primordial peace free from arising, The transcendence of any real nature.143 Since they are the object of serene wisdom, all phenomena are peace. And why are they the object of serene wisdom? The statement, free from arising, supplies the reason: it is because they are unarisen. Since they are unarisen, they are the object of serene wisdom. Why are they unarisen? As stated, there is utter transcendence of any real nature. If something has an inherent existent nature and this then were to arise, that nature would not then be existing, and what is there then that arises? Thus it is taught that there cannot at any point be arising: what did not occur before cannot then occur later, and what occurs later cannot then transform again. So what then is there? The utter transcendence of any real nature. The word primordial is used to show that it is not the case that these are only unarisen in relation to yogic wisdom. What is then being shown? That also prior to that, in the context of worldly conventions, these are in and of themselves unarisen. Primordial is a synonym for at the start, and should be understood to apply to the context of worldly conventional reality. And thus it was that the bodhisattva noble Sarvanivaraṇa Viṣkambhin gave praise to the Illustrious One expressing his excellent qualities with the words, ‘When turning the Wheel of Dharma you teach that all phenomena ….’
Those belonging to our own side do not in fact object to this. How so? Because they accept that Though pots and such aren’t there in true reality, The world’s consensus is that they in fact exist. For all phenomena this is the case, which means It doesn’t follow they’re like barren women’s sons. (6.113) Some think that, ‘When the bases for the imputation exist – earth, water, fire, wind, form, smell, taste and texture – a jar can be imputed with good reason, it is well-founded. But if it is the case that everything is nothing but imputation, and a basis for the imputation does not have any substantial existence, it cannot be denied that it becomes equivalent to the case of the son of a barren woman.’ This is unsound, because the basis for imputation cannot possibly be substantially established. As stated: Apart from form and so forth A pot cannot exist, And apart from wind and so forth Form can likewise not exist.144 Similarly: Earth, water, fire and wind do not Inherently exist by themselves. Without three, one cannot be. Without one, there cannot be three. If without three each cannot be, And without one three cannot be, Then each exists not by itself, And how to then form a composite?145 Just as you wouldn’t grant that the impermanent could arise from the permanent, it is unsound that something lacking substantial existence could come from something having substantial existence. As stated: How can impermanent things Come from what is permanent? A cause and effect that are incompatible Can never be observed.146 Thus, based on a collection of imputedly existent things such as a face, one will observe an imputed reflection in a mirror. Based on imputed constituent parts such as pillars and so forth, one imputes a house. A forest is similarly a conceptual designation based on trees. Just as one in dreams may experience sprouts, that are by nature uncreated, being created from seeds that are also by nature uncreated, it makes sense that all imputedly existent things, being imputations, may serve as supports for imputedly existent things. As stated: Through mastery of magical emanation … Are like the city of gandharvas, Similar to dreams and mirages. This is therefore not a topic of dispute.147
Now they say, ‘If production from self, other, both and uncaused is refuted on both levels, how can one then ascertain that such things as ignorance, formations and seeds give rise to consciousness, sprouts and so forth conventionally?’ To explain: And so, since things do not arise uncaused, Are not the work of an almighty god, Nor are produced from self, other, or both, They are interdependently brought forth. (6.114) As has been explained, the arising of things does not happen just naturally by itself; nor does it happen through such things as a creator god, time, particles, primordial nature (prakṛti), souls (puruṣa), Nārāyaṇa148 and so forth; nor is there production from self, other or both. And therefore it is simply the case that, in dependence on that, this arises; which ensures that worldly conventions are not violated. As the Illustrious One has stated: The hallmark of phenomena is this: If this is present, that will happen. If this has arisen, that will arise. And so, confusion leads to formations …149 Similarly, When there is this, there is that, Like short exists when there is long. When this takes place, that occurs, Like light emerging from a lamp.150 And from the Treatise as well, where it teaches that it is simply like this: An agent depends on there being an act, And the act again depends on the agent. Apart from this we see no other way To demonstrate what these are. And assimilation should thus be understood, As act and agent is then excluded. Through the case of agent and action All remaining things can be made clear.151
This explanation of interdependence as a mere conditionality, not only renders implausible any kind of conceptual notion of production that is uncaused and so forth, but also any other sort of idea: the dualities of eternalism and nihilism, permanence and impermanence, existent things and non-existent things and so forth become impossible. To express this: And as all things arise interdependently These theories will not withstand analysis. Submitted to interdependence’s arguments All complex nets of faulty views are ripped to shreds. (6.115) Since it is only through the reasoning which states, ‘based on this, that arises,’ that relative entities can be found to have an existent identity (svātmabhāva) and not through any other, the view presented here – arguing for a mere conditionality of dependent arising – tears up the entire net of faulty views. By positing such mere conditionality as dependent arising, one cannot accept that entities have any inherent nature whatsoever. As stated: Something arising based on this and that Hasn’t come into being in and of itself. How then can that which has no self-becoming Be seen as something that has come into being?152 Similarly, Interdependent arising itself Is called emptiness. This, itself being an imputation, Conveys the middle way.153 And from the sutras: What is born conditionally is unborn, Having no inherent being of its own. Depending on conditions they are said to be empty – He who understands emptiness is heedful.154
With an inherent nature impermissible, how can any of these aforementioned explanations then be maintained in its absence? If there were any kind of inherent nature, other concepts of production would be permissible: things coming about of their own accord, from self, other, both, a creator god, or the like; and following that, once things have arisen, concepts of them remaining permanently, ending in destruction, or the like. But not otherwise. To express this: Such theories are relevant if things exist, But now it has been shown how things cannot exist. Without existents such ideas can’t be maintained, Just like a fire won’t keep burning without fuel. (6.116) The arguments presented have left absolutely no room for an existent entity. For this reason the yogis who have actualised the noble path and see reality through non-seeing, do not observe even the slightest existent phenomenon. Also, any ideas of form and sensation, virtue and non-virtue, things and non-things and so forth, entertained since time without beginning, are prevented. To illustrate: for someone suffering from cataracts, applying eye-ointment has the effect of counteracting such mistaken ideas as seeing hairs, although there is no actual change in the nature of those hairs.
Thus, While ordinary men are trapped by theories, By not pursuing concepts yogis are set free. The wise have said that it’s analysis which will Alleviate one of conceptual ideas. (6.117) Since it is only the conceptual ideas that trap ordinary beings who are ignorant of this reality of things, yogis are liberated when realising this reality. For this reason the master, as explained in the Middle Way Treatise, clearly sets forth that the result of analysis is the reversal of each and every conceptual idea. As stated: If things were inherently existent, What would be the benefit in seeing emptiness? Conceptual seeing is that which binds us, And that which is refuted here.155
And therefore, He did not for the love of quarrelling present The treatise’s explorations, but to liberate. Thus, when the master gave the extensive presentations of reasoning in the Middle Way Treatise, he did not do so for the love of dispute, meaning that he didn’t present them in order to triumph over opponents. He presented these analyses so that beings could be liberated, thinking how excellent it would be if by presenting the reality of things through the Middle Way Treatise sentient beings could come to an unmistaken realisation of this reality and thereby reach liberation. ‘But haven’t you been systematically reiterating all these ideas held by your opponents and then proved them wrong? When using the treatise in this argumentative way, how can you propose that its purpose isn’t precisely the refutation of ideas?’ Let me explain. Although these analyses were not carried out for the purposes of dispute, the systems of our opponents being feeble will not be able to hold up in the face of a presentation of actual reality; they crumble just like darkness in the presence of light. So the fault lies not with us. To express this: One can’t be blamed if one’s opponents’ theories Are shattered when unravelling reality. (6.118) As stated: Although the tathāgatas did not teach This dharma for the sake of dispute, It will incinerate opposing arguments Like fire consumes its fuel.156
If this wasn’t the case, and this dharma was taught for the sake of argumentation, one would definitely develop aversion for the faulty positions of any opponents, end up cherishing the rational approach of one’s own side, and there wouldn’t be any reversal of conceptual ideas. How so? As, To be too fond of one’s own view, and hostile to The views of others, this is still conceptual. Failing to reverse conceptual ideas results in bondage, not liberation. But when this dharma isn’t used for the sake of dispute: But when desire and aversion are dispelled, Analysis will bring one swift deliverance. (6.119) As stated: Great beings are not partial, Do not engage in arguments. How can there be opposing views For those who are impartial?157 Similarly, Attached to your own position, And disliking the position of others, You will not reach transcendence. Dualism does not bring peace.158 And from a sutra: If attachment develops when learning the Dharma And dislike stirs when hearing non-Dharma, Pride and conceit become one’s downfall – Pride is a catalyst that furthers suffering.159
The selflessness of phenomena having thus been demonstrated through scripture and reasoning, there now follows a presentation of the selflessness of the person: They see how all afflictions and all faults Come from the the view of an identity. And realising its object as the self, The yogi goes on to refute this self. (6.120) The view of identity160 is to have an afflicted investigative mind that works in terms of the thoughts ‘I’ and ‘mine.’ They originate with it, meaning that the identity view is what brings them about. And what are they? The afflictions and the faults. Afflictions refer to desire and so forth. Faults refer to birth, ageing, sickness, death, grief and so forth. Every last one of these stems from the view of identity. The sutras state that all afflictions: … have their root in the view of identity, have their cause in the view of identity, originate with the identity view.161 When it states that they have their cause in the view of identity, this means that the view of identity is the cause for all of them, since mental formations will continue to be created and the suffering of birth and so forth will continue to manifest for those who have not given up the view of identity. Its reference point is the self, since self-clinging has a self as its object. So when desiring to get rid of each and every affliction and fault, it is actually the view of identity that should be abandoned; and that again is removed when having understood the selflessness of the self, which is why the yogi will first refute the self. With that refuted the view of identity too is discarded, which in turn fully counteracts afflictions and faults. Analysis of the self is therefore a means to accomplish liberation. Hence, at the very beginning yogis start by analysing the self, asking: ‘What is this so-called self, the reference point for the view of identity?’
One may then ask, ‘What is this self, the reference point for the view of identity? This we do not know.’ To take one such case: Misguided ones belive the self consumes and lasts, Is uncreative, and lacks features or pursuits. The differences between the schools of Tīrthikas Are based on minor variations on this theme. (6.121) As the Sāṃkhyas say: Primordial nature is uncreated. The seven – the great principle, etc – are both created and creative.162 The sixteen163 are just created. Soul is neither created nor creative.164 The primordial nature (or primordial creator; prakṛti)165 is so called because it has creative potential (prakaraṇa). In what situation is it creative? When seeing the desire of a soul (puruṣa).166 When a soul gives rise to desire to enjoy objects such as sound, being aware of the soul’s desire, nature joins with the soul leading to the production of sound and so forth. The order in which this takes place is in the following: From the primordial nature comes the great principle (mahat),167 from which comes the ego (ahaṃkara), and from this again the group of sixteen. Among the sixteen, the five elements come from the five, meaning that sound and so forth give rise to the elements.168 That it is uncreated implies that it has creative potential, but is not itself created in the way that the great principle is. The great principle and so forth have creative potential as well as being created manifestations, which is why it is stated that the seven – the great principle, etc – are both created and creative; the great principle and the others are creators from the point of view of their own creations, and they are created from the point of view of the primordial nature. The sixteen that consist of the mind faculty and so forth are only creations, which is why it says that the sixteen are created. The word just (tu) makes it clear that they are exclusively creations. When it comes to souls, the phrase soul is neither created nor creative, is saying that it does not have creative potential nor is a created manifestation. This being the order in which all types of manifest creations happen, something should be said about how the soul becomes a consumer as it gives rise to desire. This happens when, governed by the understanding mind the mental faculties of the ear and so forth focus on the apprehended object, such as sound, making the soul aware of the mentally grasped object. Since it is therefore in the soul’s nature to entertain this mental awareness, it is said that ‘the self enjoys the objects.’ Desire hence leads to the passionate consumption of objects, but when passion is diminished and the soul becomes free from the desire for objects, a gradual development of meditative absorptions can take place leading to the adoption of divine sensory powers. With that one comes to see the reality of things through divine sight, and on observing this gives rise to a sense of shame, similar to that felt by an adulteress; and with no further incitement towards the self there is then release. A step by step reversal of all the groups of manifest creations leads to pleace without any further appearances, at which point the soul is left in its solitary state, and this is what is called liberation.
It is permanent in the sense that, although temporarily crippled by manifest creations, it always remains uncrippled in its original and isolated stated. While the primordial nature is an active creator, and among the manifest creations some are also active creators, the self is a non-creator in the sense of being a disinterested spectator to activities. The way in which it is an enjoyer has already been explained above. It is without properties (guṇa) since it is not of the nature of rajas, tamas and sattva.169 Since pervasiveness does not involve activity, it is inactive. These are the characteristics of the soul (puruṣa). It was mentioned that, ‘while the primordial nature is an active creator, and among the manifest creations some are also active creators…;’ so which of the manifest creations are active creators and which are not? We will go into some detail to explain this matter. Rajas, tamas and sattva are the three properties. Rajas is characterised by movement and involvement, tamas by heaviness and darkness, and sattva by lightness and clarity. They are synonymous with happiness, suffering and confusion. In the primary principle (pradhāna) these are in perfect equilibrium, their qualities in their original form cancelling each other out. The primordial nature (prakṛti) is the state when these have not yet manifestly evolved. As was said, ‘from the primordial nature comes the great principle (mahat),’ a synonym for intelligence (buddhi). From the great principle comes the ego (ahaṃkara), which has three forms: changeable (vikāra[?]), luminous (sāttvika) and dark (tāmasika). From the changeable ego come the five subtle elements (tanmātra): form, sound, smell, taste and texture. From the subtle elements come the major elements: earth, water, fire, wind and ether. From the luminous ego come the five motor organs (voice, hands, legs, anus and genitals) and five mental organs (eyes, ears, nose, tongue and skin), which together with mind, which has both characteristics, makes eleven. The dark ego is involved in both other types of ego. The great principle, the ego and the five subtle elements are creators and creations, while the ten faculties, mind and major elements are only creations. The primordial nature is uncreated. This is what the scripture states.
The different systems of the misguided (tīrthika) are similar to that propounded by the Sāṃkhyas with minor variations. The Vaiśeṣikas say that the self has nine principles: intelligence, pleasure, pain, desire, anger, effort, righteousness (dharma), non-righteousness (adharma) and creative force. Intelligence is what apprehends objects. Pleasure is the experience of desired objects. Pain it its opposite. Attachment is to be drawn towards desirable things. Aversion is to feel opposed to undesirable objects. Effort is to have the adroitness to bring one’s goals to completion. Righteousness is what brings higher states and the excellent goal. Non-righteousness is the opposite. Creative force is what thinking leads to, and is the cause of thinking. As long as these nine principles of the self remain present in the self, one will keep engaging in their related virtuous and non-virtuous activities, thus perpetuating cyclic existence. When the soul, through discriminative insight, manages to sever the principles of intelligence and so forth at the root, it will remain in its own true state and become liberated. The self is also described as permanent, a creator, a consumer, endowed with properties and, since it is pervasive, inactive. There are some who hold that it is active due to the fact that it contracts and expands. The Vedavādins assert for instance that it is like the space inhabiting jars: a difference in bodies makes what is singular manifold. The differences between the systems of misguided schools are hence based on minor variations in how the self is specified to be.
Concerning this self that is talked about in the various scriptural traditions of the misguided: Since it is unborn, like a barren woman’s son, There cannot be a self like that of which you speak, It cannot be the basis for the sense of self – As even relative that would not be allowed. (6.122) This is because it would contradict their own inferential logic. Since it is unborn, just like the son of a barren woman, a self such as they present it, cannot exist. And, being unborn, it can also not be the reference for the ego (ahaṃkara). One should see that, not only is it unreasonable for it to exist and be the reference for ego in actual reality, but also relatively it doesn’t have these two traits.
And not only does it not make sense that it is something existent and supports the ego, also And since its qualities that one may find described Within the various scriptures of the Tīrthikas Are contradicted when they argue it’s unborn, These features will amount to nothing in the end. (6.123) According to the scriptures of the Sāṃkhyas, the self is characterised as being permanent, a non-creator, a consumer, without features and inactive. But this self can’t be permanent, can’t be a non-creator and so forth, and can’t be inactive because – as they themselves say – it is unborn, just as the son of a barren woman. This will apply equally against the tradition of the Vaiśeṣikas, using the same line of reasoning, ‘The self can’t be permanent, can’t be a non-creator…,’ and so forth. This position can in fact be used against any proponent of self, using the argument of it being unborn and the example of the barren woman’s son to expose the thing itself and its features.
This being the case, There is therefore no self distinct from aggregates, There is therefore no self that exists as something separate from the aggregates, since apart from the them no self can be perceived. If it did exist as something separate from the aggregates, it would be something that could be established on its own, but this is not the case. Hence, no self exists that is distinct from the aggregates, Since it can’t be perceived without the aggregates. As stated: It is not possible for there to be a self That is different from the assimilated. If separate it should be perceived also without The assimilated, yet it is not.170 Likewise, If it was different from the aggregates, It would not have the aggregates’ characteristics.171 Not only is a self that is different from the aggregates non-existent; also Since they know no such thing and still think there’s a self, The worldly wouldn’t claim the ego is thus based. (6.124) Even those who do not identify the self in these particular ways will still due to their habitual clinging have notions of ‘I’ and ‘mine,’ and thus believe in a self. It is therefore not viable that there is a self distinct from the aggregates that forms the support for the ego. They may then think, ‘Even though they do not at present think of it in terms of being permanent, unproduced and so forth, from past familiarity they still have the view that it is the ego’s reference point.’ That is not so. It is not the case that only those who have a familiarity with the scriptures of these individuals believe in a self.
One may observe that there are those without such prior familiarity, who still maintain a sense of ego in this life have, such as: Through aeons born among for instance animals, They would not think it unproduced and permanent. Yet still they would be harbouring a sense of self. There is therefore no self distinct from aggregates. (6.125) Beings that have not left the animal states for an untold number of aeons, will not during that time have considered there to be a self that has these features. The words for instance (api) are meant to include hell beings and so forth. Having observed that those who haven’t been exposed to a self that that havs these features, still have a sense of ego, what rational individual would then insist that such a self, forming the basis for a sense of ego, exists? There cannot therefore be a self that is distinct from the aggregates.
There are some belonging to our own side who say: Some say no self is found distinct from aggregates, The reference for self-view is thus the aggregates. The reasonings presented have shown that no self can be found separate from the aggregates. There is therefore no self that is distinct from the aggregates, and the aggregates are hence the only reference for the view of identity. This is why it is said that the self is merely the aggregates alone. This is the position held by the noble Saṃmitīya school172 , who belong to our own tradition. Among them, While some insist all five support the view of self, Some others will insist it is the mind alone. (6.126) For some it is the five aggregates (form, feeling, perception, formations and consciousness) which serve as the reference for the view of identity, and maintain that it is in connection with them that this conception of selfhood occurs. As is stated: The Illustrious One said: O mendicants, those ascetics and brahmins who perceive things in terms of ‘I’, are in fact only perceiving the five assimilated aggregates.173 They therefore say that it was in order to clarify the statement, ‘The view you have is in relation to a collection (kāya) that is by nature perishing (√sad-), and not in relation to an I or a mine,’174 that he expressed the view (dṛṣṭi) that insists on I and mine as being the view of identity (satkāyadṛṣṭi).175 Others claim that the self is in the mind, and refer to verses such as the following, where the mind is spoken of as the self: Oneself is one’s own protector. Who else can protect one? The wise attain the higher realms By properly taming the self.176 How do they support this? By saying that there is no self apart from the aggregates, and that other sutra statements talk of taming the mind: To tame the mind is excellent. Taming the mind brings happiness.177 The mind being the basis of the ego, is thus labeled the self.
To reply to this: The aggregates are multiple, so if they are The self, the consequence would be a lot of selves. The self is then a substance, and can be observed, And what you can engage is not a fallacy. (6.127) To hold the position that the aggregates are the self will mean that the self is manifold because the aggregates are manifold. And if it was the case that mind is the self, one could distinguish between eye-consciousness and so forth, or between the different moments of consciousness appearing and disappearing, and the self would also then be multiple. Fault like this must be mentioned if one is to follow reason. What the faults will be, is in this way explained to those who profess the self to be the aggregates or the consciousness, and other faults that befall them are mentioned in relation to each of these positions. A scriptural source states that, ‘With birth in the world, only a single individual is born,’178 which means that the self is not held to be multiple. Concerning the statement the self would be substantial, since the concept of aggregate is used in relation to substances of form and so forth distinguished in terms of the past and so forth, and it is only in relation to these that the convention self is used, the self too would be a substance. And that is not the intent of the following statements: Mendicants, these five are mere names, mere conventions, mere designations. Which five? The past, the future, space, transcendence and the individual.179 And: As with a gathering of parts One may speak of a chariot, Contingent on the aggregates Convention grants a sentient being.180 Since it follows that the self would be substantial, the aggregates cannot therefore be the self. Also, since the view of identity would be based in something substantial, not being mistaken it would be equal to conceptions such as blue or yellow. To give up the view of identity would not then an abandonment of the origin, but would simply be like letting go of an attraction towards an object, such as visual impressions of blue, yellow and so forth.
Also, Nirvana would be the destruction of the self. Before, it would arise and vanish all the time. Without an agent the result would not exist. Distinct are culprit and experiencing side. (6.128) If the self were made up of the aggregates, when one reaches nirvana and the aggregates are discontinued, the self would be annihilated. Such a belief in annihilation would be a nihilistic view, since according to yourself it constitutes an extremist view to think that there is permanence or annihilation in relation to any idea of selfhood involved in the ‘I’- and ‘mine’-based view of self. One cannot therefore accept that the self is discontinued at the time of nirvana, since that would constitute an extremist view. Hence, the self cannot be made up of the aggregates. Just as prior to entering nirvana, the aggregates arise and vanish every instant, the self too would be arising and vanishing, since the self is made up of the aggregates. And just as one couldn’t then say, ‘This body of mine came into being,’ the statement, ‘At that point, at that time, I was a king named Māndātṛ,’ would not have been made, because the self, just like the body, would have been destroyed, and it would be accepted that it was another that was born at present. As the Treatise states: The assimilated, which arises And ceases to be, is not the self. How indeed could the assimilated Become the that which assimilates.181 Likewise, If the self were the aggregates, It would be appearing and disappearing.182 And if it keeps appearing and disappearing, an agent self does not exist, which means it cannot have a relationship to a result. If the act by which it comes into being is impermanent, the agent then no longer existing, having nothing to support it the act as well will not exist. There will then be no viable relationship between actions and their results. If the result of karma produced in a prior moment were experienced in subsequent moments, the result of karma accumulated by one would be experienced by another, which is why it says, the culprit and the experiencer would be other. What has been done can then disappear, and there can be consequences from what one has not done. The Treatise states: If it were different, even in the absence Of that it could then still be present. And what was would likewise then remain, It could now be born without having died. Karmas would disappear, be annihilated, And the consequence of acts carried out by one Could be experienced by another. These and other faults would follow.183 It does not therefore make sense that the aggregates can be the self.
They might then say: ‘Although the former and latter moments are indeed different, they form a single continuum and we are therefore not at fault.’ To reply: ‘It’s really one continuum, thus we’re not at fault;’ The problems with continua were shown before. This was treated when it was said, things related respectively to Maitreya and Upagupta…184 And as stated: If being a human is different from a god, That would mean impermanence. If being a human is different from a god, A continuity becomes untenable.185 Thus, since it does not make sense that things that are mutually distinct can be included within a single continuum, this consequence cannot be avoided. To express that neither the aggregates nor the mind can therefore be the self, it was said: The aggregates or mind as self thus makes not sense, The foregoing discussion of unwanted consequences is not the only thing that shows how untenable it is for the aggregates or the mind to be the self. In addition: The world as finite and so forth was not endorsed. (6.129) Since it was not mentioned whether there is an end to the world and so forth, it does not make sense to say that the aggregates or the mind is the self. The fourteen indeterminable issues are mentioned by all schools: ‘The world is eternal’ or ‘the world is not eternal;’ or ‘the world is both eternal and not eternal’ or ‘the world is neither eternal nor not eternal…;’186 Since the Illustrious One said that no reply could be given to these, they are classified as indeterminable issues (avyākṛtamūla). These were hence dismissed, and if a mendicant upholds the idea that the world is eternal, the scriptures of the Pūrvaśaila school state that, ‘The one who upholds the view that the world is eternal is subject to expulsion. The one who upholds the view that the world is not eternal is subject to expulsion. The one who upholds the view that the world is both eternal and not eternal is subject to expulsion. The one who upholds the view that the world is neither eternal nor not eternal is subject to expulsion;’ and that one should not associate with them.187 There are thus said to be fourteen indeterminable issues. And if you take the word world to mean the aggregates, since the aggregates arise and cease and are therefore impermanent, one would in effect determine that the world is not eternal. And by saying that the aggregates are not present subsequent to nirvana, one is determining that the world is finite. One would similarly have determined that the Tathāgata does not exist after death. But since the statements saying that the world is finite and so forth were dismissed, it is thus unreasonable that the aggregates themselves can be the self.
Also, For you, when yogis understand the lack of self, All things would then lose their existence certainly. If the aggregates or the mind were the self, when the yogi ponders the truth and understands the truth of suffering in terms of non-self – that ‘all phenomena are selfless’ – then it would be seeing the lack of aggregates that would be seeing the lack of self, which is not what you assert. The aggregates cannot therefore be the self. One might contend, ‘When the term self is used in the context of the relationship between the act and its result, it can only be referring to the aggregates as there is nothing else that can be the self. But when seeing the lack of self, it is the soul (puruṣa), the inner experiencer (antaḥkaraṇa) imagined by non-buddhists, that is being referred to. Thus, when seeing selflessness one is just seeing the idea of a lack of this inner soul, and it does not follow that one is seeing the lack of all things.’ To reply: If it is an eternal self that is dismissed, Then neither mind nor aggregates can be the self. (6.130) If you worry that the consequence will be that there are then no existent things, and so seize on the idea that the term self refers to a permanent self, no longer thinking that it is the aggregates or the mind that are the self, then you have deserted your own position. One might then think, ‘I do not agree that that is what it is referring in that context, and therefore I am not at fault.’ Well, this too will not suffice. How can you just be adopting whatever unreasonable position that you like, saying that in that particular case it is the inner soul that is the self, and otherwise it is the aggregates? If you say it is because it just can’t be, it has also already been shown that it is impossible that it can be referring to the aggregates. Hence, if you do not accept that in the context of the thought, ‘all phenomena are selfless,’ the term self refers to the aggregates, you cannot claim that it does so elsewhere. If you claim that it does refer to the aggregates elsewhere, then you will have to say it does in this context too.
Also, For you the yogi seeing selflessness would not Then realise the reality of form and such. Not having seen its nature, when perceiving form They’re caught by it, creating passion and so forth. (6.131) Someone who has not savoured the nectar found in the centre of the flower cannot gain an experience of it merely by saying that there is a cuckoo upon the flower. And once its flavour is known, the experience will not go away, and one cannot rid oneself of the accompanying clinging, just by saying there’s no cuckoo upon flower. It’s the same in this case. If a yogi sees that phenomena like forms and so forth lack a permanent self but does not come to understand their nature, what will he have gained? And, although by perceiving the nature of forms and so forth the attachment to such perceptions are relinquished, what effect will that have on the non-existent self? Nobody who understands its lack of existence and abandons attachment to these objects is doing this so that it may experience pleasure, thinking, ‘May the inner soul be happy!’; or, worrying that it will suffer, avoids those things that are uncomfortable to it. Since perception of form leads to this involvement, attachment and so forth will be the outcome. And since coming to understand its nature will not lead to the destruction of attachment and so forth, this approach may be considered equal to that of non-Buddhist schools.
One might think, ‘We accept the validity of the scriptures, and will not be harmed by these logical measures. And the scriptures do state that the aggregates constitute the self: O mendicants, those ascetics and brahmins who perceive things in terms of ‘I’, are in fact only perceiving the five assimilated aggregates.188 ‘And so, this is the case here too.’ That aggregates are self, you base this claim upon The Teacher’s statement that, ‘The aggregates are self.’ But this refutes a self distinct from aggregates, As other sutras state that form is not the self. (6.132) This sutra where it is recognised that, ‘The aggregates are the self,’ is not in fact saying that the aggregates constitute the self. What does it then say? The intent of the Illustrious One was to indicate that there is no self whatsoever separate from the aggregates, in order to refute the scriptures of the misguided using the relative truth, and to clarify what is the unmistaken relative truth. If you ask how one can be certain that this is a refutation of a self that is distinct from the aggregates, the reason is that other sutras refute the idea that form and so forth constitute the self.
‘How so?’ That neither form nor feeling constitute the self, Nor do perception, formations, or consciousness, Has been proclaimed in various other sutra quotes. In brief, that aggregates are self is not affirmed. (6.133) It is therefore certain that when this sutra states, ‘[when they] regard these five assimilated aggregates as the self…,’189 it is in fact refuting that there is a self that is something other than the aggregates. While instances when form and so forth constituting a self is refuted, should be taken to express a refutation of the self that is the object of the view of identity, as dependently imputed in relation to the assimilated aggregates, since these are contexts where one is considering the actual reality of things. And it makes sense that one will be freed from attachment to form and so forth since, ‘When the assimilator is not observed, what it assimilates will likewise not be present.’ As this is what is stated in other sutras, the previous sutra quote is not therefore claiming that the aggregates are the self.
Also, although this sutra statement is phrased as an affirmation, it wouldn’t serve to indicate that the aggregates constitute the self. And why? As, When saying it’s the aggregates that are the self, It’s their collection, not the aggregates themselves. For example, when saying that the trees make up the forest, it is the collection of trees that are a forest. It is not the trees themselves, since it would then follow that the forest is present in each individual tree. Likewise, it is the collection of the aggregates that make up the self. And since a collection isn’t actually anything whatsoever: But this does not exist, and so it cannot be – Can’t be protector, cannot tame, nor serve as judge. (6.134) The Illustrious One spoke of a protector and a judge in the statement: Oneself is one’s own protector. Oneself is one’s own enemy. Oneself is one’s own judge Of one’s good and bad deeds.190 And of a tamer in the statement: The wise attain the higher realms By properly taming their self.191 A collection however, not being something substantially existent, cannot logically be a protector, a tamer, or a judge, and the collection is therefore not the self.
One may think, ‘Because the collection is not anything apart from the collected parts, one identifies the result as the collection of parts. It is hence permissible to speak of a protector, a tamer and a judge.’ This cannot be, since the problems with that have already been explained. And also, A chariot would be the presence of its parts. As with a chariot, the same goes for the self. From a sutra: ‘A self’, you say, O demon mind; A fancy you thus entertain. It’s void this heap, of factors formed. There is no being present here. As with a gathering of parts One may speak of a chariot, Contingent on the aggregates Convention grants a sentient being.192 Thus, ‘Contingent on the aggregates,’ the sutra states. The self is thus not just the aggregates combined. (6.135) Something that is contingently imputed cannot be reduced to the assembly of its perceived parts, because a dependent labelling is taking place, just as when elements combine to form a product. Although things may be produced from the elements and receive labels such as blue and so forth, or eye and so forth, these two types of phenomena are not just the mere assembly of the elements. Similarly, although the self has the characteristic of being an imputation made in relation to the aggregates, that it is just the assembly of the aggregates does not suffice. One might object, ‘That is inconclusive owing to things such as pots.’ No it isn’t, since one cannot prove that such things as pots are reducible to the gathering of form and so forth, and because of similar criticisms.193
One could ask, ‘If the mere collection of wheels and so forth is not the chariot, then what is?’ And it might then be supposed that only when the wheels and so forth assume a certain shape does the term chariot become applicable. And likewise, that the self is just the arrangement of form and so forth. But that is not so. And why? ‘It is the shape,’ you say, but shape belongs to form. So though you say it’s these that constitute the self, The mental groups cannot then be what this self is And why is that? Due to the fact that these cannot assume a shape. (6.136) Meaning that this is so because they have no physical form.
Furthermore, It makes no sense that grasped and grasper are the same, Why? Since act and actor then would be identical. The grasper means the one who assimilates by performing the grasping, while the act is the assimilation that takes place when something is grasped. And here, the grasper is a reference to the self, while the grasped refers to the five aggregates. If the self is the mere collection of form and so forth, then the grasper and the act are identical. But this would not be acceptable, since it would then follow that the elements and the material components they make up, and the pot and the potter, are identical. As stated: If fuel were the fire, Act and actor are identical.194 And, The fire and the fuel thus fully clarify All such relationships, The self and what is assimilated, along with things Like earthen pots, woollen cloths and such.195 Here it is saying that, just as fire and fuel cannot be claimed to be identical, this claim does not hold for the self and the assimilated either. One might think, ‘There is no existent assimilator doing the acting, there is nothing more than the mere collection of the assimilated.’ But to explain how this is unreasonable: ‘There is no actor, just the act,’ you might then think. But no, since without actor there can be no act. (6.137) Thus it can’t be like that: if one does not accept an actor, the act which is then unfounded cannot be accepted. As the Treatise states: And assimilation should thus be understood, As act and agent is then excluded. Through the case of agent and action All remaining things can be made clear.196 Here, the verb root has been combined with the lyuṭ-suffix197 , making upādāna, with reference to the act of assimilation. But since a verb root cannot occur isolated from its function, the way it functions implies that which is assimilated and the assimilator; since in the word in question, assimilation (upādāna), the verb has been supplied with a lyuṭ-suffix, by the rule which states, ‘kṛt and lyuṭ are inclusive,’198 it is also expressive of that which is assimilated. Thus, just as it is in relation to an actor that the acted is designated, and in relation to the acted that an actor is designated, the assimilator is similarly designated in relation to the assimilated, and the assimilated in relation to the assimilator. It states: So it is neither distinct from the assimilated, Nor the same as the assimilated. There is no self without the assimilated, Still one can’t conclude that it does not exist.199 This is saying that there cannot be an act in the absence of an actor. And when it is stated that, ‘Though the actor is not apprehended, the act still exists, as does its result,’200 this is meant to refute an inherently existent actor. It is not to be understood as saying that conventional norms of what is dependently designated should be discarded. As stated: A person affected by ignorance generates meritorious formations…201
Also, The Sage states that the self is recognised With reference to earth, water, fire, wind, To consciousness and space – six elements – And six supports of contact, such as eyes; (6.138)
And is assumed from mind and mental states. And it is therefore these though not the same, Nor just the mere collection they make up. One cannot find the sense of self in these. (6.139) From the sutras: O Great King. The person, the individual, is the six elements, the six fields of contact and the eighteen movements of the mind.202 The six elements are earth, water, fire, wind, consciousness and space, and it is in relation to these that the self is imputed. The six supports of contact, such as eyes, refer to the sense field of visual perception and so forth, up to the sense field of mental perception, and it is in relation to these that the self is imputed. The eighteen movements of the mind refers to the six ways the mind can be pleasantly involved with visual, audible, olfactory, palatable, tactile, or mental objects, the ways it can be unpleasantly involved with these, and the ways it can have a neutral involvement with these; and in relation to these, and assumed from the mind and mental states, the self is imputed. Since it is stated that, ‘the self is imputed in relation to the elements and so forth,’ it here states, it is these though not the same, meaning that it is not anything other nor is it the same. It neither makes sense that is it just the mere collection of these. Since it cannot be that the self is these aforementioned phenomena, it does not stand to reason that the ego mind is found in them. And when the aggregates cannot be the abode of the ego, and is not something other than the aggregates, the ego then has no abode; and the yogi seeing no ‘I’ comes to understand that neither does ‘mine’ have any essence, eliminates every conditioned phenomenon and transcends to the state free from adoption, illustrating how brilliant this analysis is.
If those saying the aggregates, or the mind, are the abodes of the self were right, a sense of self would remain as long the aggregates were present, since they constitute the actual basis for the sense of self. To explain: That seeing selflessness would shed the lasting self While not believing it to be ego’s support, I find it quite astounding then to hear you say That knowing selflessness uproots the view of self. (6.140) If the ego is based in a permanent self, and without it the ego is shed, yet you claim the abode of the self to be something other than that, and that only through seeing that something else is lacking that the sense of ego is halted – my goodness! How extraordinary!
To clarify this lack of a relationship through an example: Like he who finds that there’s a snake within his wall, Proclaiming it’s no elephant to ease his fright And to escape the harm the serpent can inflict, Will surely end up being ridiculed by all. (6.141) Someone encountering a dangerous situation, but who does not see the danger they’re in and fails to take the appropriate steps to avoid it, thus remaining relaxed and displaying no anxiety, will end up being bitten by the snake. That no elephant is present will not be helpful in removing the danger the snake poses. It is the same when one says that the aggregates or consciousness are the self, as a lack of a permanent self will not then be any help in removing the ego which is based in the aggregates. This cyclic state will certainly not then subside.
Having thus given an exhaustive treatment of these two positions, showing how the self can neither be composed of nor distinct from the aggregates, it is discussed how the self cannot be existent within a relationship of support and supported: The self is not within the aggregates, Nor are the aggregates found in the self. If they were different that could be surmised. As they’re not different it’s but an idea. (6.142) If there were a difference it would make sense that things could be a support and a supported, as when saying there is curd in a bowl. The bowl and the curd being different from the worldly point of view, are seen to be in a relationship of support and supported. But since the aggregates are not separate from the self in this manner, and the self is not separate from the aggregates, these two cannot be in a relationship of support and supported.
To indicate how the self cannot be the possessor of the aggregates it was said: One cannot claim the self possesses form, because There is no self, so ownership does not apply. One owns a cow: distinct. One has a body: same. But form is not the same nor different from the self. (6.143) That the self could be the same as or different from the aggregates has already been disproved. Possession too is problematic. When saying that Devadatta has a body no difference perceived, while when saying he owns a cow a difference certainly exists. But as there is neither identity nor difference in relation to form and the self, it isn’t possible to say that the self could possess form.
Now, to enumerate the mistaken perceptions and aspects involved in the view of identity by summarising the positions that have been refuted, it is said: Form’s not the self, the self does not possess the form, There is no self in form, and form’s not within self – All aggregates considered in this fourfold way And added up amount to twenty views of self. (6.144) When the five aggregates’ lack of self is considered in terms of the four aspects of the view of identity, the twentyfold view of identity emerges. But in the Treatise, in the context of the fivefold analysis, doesn’t it state the following? He is not the aggregates, nor different from them, The aggregates are not in him, nor is he in them, The Tathāgata does not possess the aggregates – So who is the Tathāgata?203 But how can that make twenty as mentioned above, when multiplied by five? This division of the view of identity is found presented in the sutras, and as there is no way of being caught up in a self without perceiving the aggregates, it is the fourfold way of perceiving the aggregates that is relevant. There would in fact be no way of coming to believe in a self if it weren’t for the aggregates, and the fifth aspect is therefore not possible in relation to the view of identity. The view of identity is therefore only twentyfold. The fifth way mentioned in the Treatise – that of otherness – should be taken as refutating the traditions of the misguided (tīrthika).
As the scriptures state, when the twenty lofty peaks of the view of identity are brought down, the resultant state of a stream-enterer will manifest: The vajra-wisdom seeing selflessness brings down The mountains of the view of self, and when that goes The lofty peaks that rest upon this massive range Of viewing an identity are also crushed. (6.145) For as long as the noble vajra of wisdom does not descend upon the mountain of the view of identity, the rock face of afflictions will grow daily, emerging from beginningless cyclic existence as it rises as high as the hilltops of the three worlds, spreading throughout all directions and emerging from the golden ground of ignorance. When demolished by the vajra of realising selflessness, those lofty peaks, here to be understood as its summits, will be destroyed together with it.
Now, for the refutation of a substantially existent imputed self as proposed by the Saṃmitīyas, it was said: Some claim the person is substantial, yet cannot Be labeled same or other, permanent or not, That it’s an object of the six consciousnesses, And claim this is the basis for the sense of self. (6.146) As said here: firstly, not being able to be perceived except for the aggregates, the person cannot be distinct from them; it is further also not constituted by the aggregates, as its arising and ceasing would be a consequence; hence rendering being described as the same as or different from the aggregates impossible. As it cannot be the same or different, it cannot be described as permanent or impermanent either, but it is known by the six consciousnesses. It further makes sense that the person is substantially existent, being described as the actor and the enjoyer, and that which links samsara and nirvana, bondage and liberation. This is what is held to be the abode for the sense of self.
To explain how it does not make sense to say this: To say, ‘mind is distinct from body,’ means it’s not Ineffable – real things can’t be ineffable. If self was proven to be real in any way, It would be real, like mind, and not ineffable. (6.147) After this verse, showing how something cannot at the same time be ineffable and substantially existent,
… to explain how it has imputed existence, it was said: Since, as you say, a pot is not real in itself – There’s nothing to point out apart from form and such – Do not then think the self exists from its own side When it’s ineffable except for aggregates. (6.148) The sense intended here is that a pot can neither be described as the same as, nor different from, form and so forth, and is thence held to have imputed existence. And as with a pot, the self too should then be an imputation.
After having given refutation and proof in the two foregoing verses, and seeing as an existent thing may be talked of in terms of sameness and difference, we now embark upon a refutation of the self based on the fact that it does not have the features of an existent entity. You would agree that consciousness is not distinct From its own self, yet is a thing distinct from form. As these two aspects may be seen in entities, No self exists; it lacks the features of a thing. (6.149) If, as you say, the self is substantially existent, it should surely be like consciousness, which is not distinct from itself, while it is distinct from form and so forth. But, as it is not, it is therefore not an entity that has the features phenomena usually have. Hence, the self is not an existent entity like a pot.
With this analysis it therefore does not make sense for the person to be substantially existent. The basis of the sense of self is thus no thing, Not other than the aggregates, nor them themselves; It isn’t their support, or else possessing them. When the abode of the sense of self is analysed, that it is substantially existent makes no sense. It cannot be distinct from the aggregates, isn’t constituted by the aggregates, and doesn’t have a supportive relationship with them either. The words it is their support would imply that the aggregates exist based upon it, but as a succinct description it is meant to cover both options in the support-supported relationship. It also does not make sense that it possesses the aggregates. Hence, it is still acceptable to assert that the self is an imputation, or imperceptible. But the aforementioned aspects may not be used to proclaim a self: And yet related to the aggregates it’s there. (6.150) With the simple expression, ‘based on this, that arises,’ no claim to production that is causeless and so forth is made, and the framework of the relative truth is not infringed upon. Similarly, in this case: when contingent on a dependent imputation, the faulty aspects mentioned are avoided, and thus retaining worldly convention and being accepted as an imputation contingent on the aggregates, a self is seen according to conventional designations.
An external example is now provided to clarify the point that the self is an imputed idea as just explained: A chariot is not distinct from its own parts, Nor indistinct, and their possessor it is not, It is not in its parts, they aren’t contained in it, It’s not the mere assembly, nor is it the shape. (6.151) Five of the positions mentioned here have already been covered previously: that of sameness, difference, support, supported and possessor.
The positions of a collection and of shape needs to be demonstrated, and are therefore now explained: If just the mere assembly were the chariot, The chariot would be there in the separate parts. This point has been previously made. It is here revisited since it provides clarification by mentioning additional faults. It may then be said: Without an owner of the parts they can’t be parts. The chariot as shape will neither make much sense. (6.152) Since there can be no parts when there is no owner of the parts, the parts do not exist. How can their assembly then be the chariot? Here the word also (api; here: neither) is used in an inclusive sense and should be understood to include the unreasonableness of either the mere shape or the mere assembly being the chariot. How so? Because they cannot be parts if there is no possessor of parts. For the mere shape to be the chariot does not then work. The non-existence of the possessor of the parts is accepted by those belonging to our own side.204
Furthermore, if the shape is claimed to be the chariot, is it then contended that the shape is that of the parts or the collection? If it is suggested that it is the shape of the individual parts, do they still have their former shape, or have they left it behind? That they have not left it behind makes no sense. Why? You say the shape that each part had before Is present now within the chariot. Then just as when it was in separate parts, It’s not there now when there’s a chariot. (6.153) If the particular shapes that the wheels and so forth had before there was a chariot are exactly the same as the particular shapes of the wheels and so forth when there is a chariot, then it follows that just as the chariot is not there when they are disassembled, it should equally not be there even when they form a chariot, since its shape is indistinguishable from that of the parts.
In case of the second position, that only with a difference in shape is there a chariot, then: And if right now, when there’s a chariot here, The wheels and so forth have a different shape, Then this should be perceived, but it is not. The chariot is thus not just the shape. (6.154) If the particular shapes (square, long, round and so forth) that the individual parts (wheels, axle, nails and so forth) had before were to have distinctively different shapes when they constitute the chariot, then this should be perceptible. But we do not see that. We do not see the wheel’s spokes, rim, hub and so forth to have other shapes when mounted on the chariot. The squareness and so forth of the axle and other parts are likewise not transformed into something else. Hence, it makes no sense for the chariot to be the shape of its parts.
One might think, ‘It is the particular shape of the gathered parts, wheels and so forth, that is the chariot.’ To explain how this likewise does not make sense: For you, collections are not real at all, Its shape is thus not that of gathered parts. For how could it assume a shape at all, Based on something that’s utterly unreal? (6.155) If a so-called collection had the slightest real existence, it could serve as the basis for the designation of a shape. But this collection of parts is not a real entity at all. And how can that which has no existence whatsoever serve as a basis for the imputation of a shape, when it is claimed that imputations can only be made based on something substantial?
They assert that, ‘Though it is unreal, in dependence on this collection there is an unreal shape.’ And that’s exactly it: But it is just as you yourself assert, That based upon a cause that is unreal Arise results that are themselves unreal. Please see that this is how all things occur. (6.156) Unreal formations come about based on unreal ignorance. Unreal sprouts arise from unreal seeds. All causal relationships should be understood to have this character of unreality. Why completely exhaust oneself in the pointless pursuit of real things, like chasing the shadow-deer whose meat one cannot eat?
This shows it makes no sense that the idea Of pot comes from these bases such as form. There are some who say that it is upon such bases as form and so forth that ideas of pots and so forth are made.205 But the example of the chariot disproves this as well. Furthermore, And being unproduced these don’t exist, That they comprise a shape is hence unsound. (6.157) That form and so forth are not produced has been explained previously. And not being produced, form and so forth do not exist. How could it make sense for things that do not exist to be the cause of imputations such as pot? Hence, to claim that pots and so forth is the assimilation of something substantial does not make sense, and therefore pots and other things do not inhere in the particular shapes of the physical constituents and so forth.
Here it might be interjected: ‘But if the chariot is found not to exist when scrutinised in the sevenfold manner just explained, without the existence of the chariot the conventional designation of chariot employed in the world would be invalidated. However, we do see the use of such commands as, “Fetch the chariot!”, “Please buy a chariot,” “Please mend the chariot,” and so forth. Based on general consensus then, things such as chariots must exist.’ To respond: It is in fact you who end up with this problem. A chariot is found to be untenable when subjected to the scrutiny of the sevenfold analysis explained above, but you refuse to accept that there are alternative ways of allowing existent things to remain valid. How can such worldly conventions as the statement, ‘Fetch the chariot!’, then retain their validity for you? We are not affected by this problem, because: These seven points leave it unjustified Both in reality, and in the world. But left unanalysed the world will still Identify it based upon its parts. (6.158) When scrutinised in this sevenfold manner – by saying that the chariot is not distinct from its own parts and so forth – one cannot prove that there is a chariot either ultimately or relatively. But if analysis is suspended, just as there are things such as the colour blue or the experience of feelings, it is still the case that in the worldly context it is imputed in relation to its parts, such as the wheels and so forth. The consequence that worldly conventions will be violated does not therefore apply to us, because the assertion of a dependent imputation is similar to asserting the mere conditionality of dependent arising. Our opponents would therefore do well to accept this.
With this position, not only does worldly consensus make the usage of the conventional designation chariot perfectly clear, but the particular implications of the term will also, when not subjected to analysis, be acceptable according to worldly norms. As such, It’s something that has parts, composed of separate bits. A chariot is held to be a functional thing. For people it is real as what assimilates. The chariot is something that has parts based on the fact that it consists of parts such as wheels and so forth. And it is composed of separate bits from the fact that its bits are the wheels and so forth. It is a functional thing in relation to how it assimilates the constituent wheels and so forth. It is posited as an assimilator in relation to what it assimilates. There are some with a mistaken understanding of the scriptures, who say that the mere collection of parts exists, but the possessor of the parts has no existence whatsoever, because it is not apprehended as distinct from them. They likewise say that only the bits exist but not what they compose; that only the action exists but not the actor; and as nothing is perceived apart from the assimilated, the assimilated exist but the assimilator does not. And when they adhere to this distorted description of the worldly relative, the consequence of their own argument will be that the parts, and so forth, too are non-existent. Do not lay waste to what the world agrees upon! (6.159) This should certainly be avoided.
It is a fact that when subjected to such scrutiny the worldly relative is rendered non-existent, yet when left unanalysed consensus makes it existent. And through this tiered approach the yogi swiftly determines the depths of the actual reality of things. How is this done? The yogi asks, ‘These seven points show it’s unreal, So how can it exist?’ – and finds that it does not. With this they easily access the truth of things. That it is real is still accepted here and now. (6.160) Upon investigation the yogi will think, ‘If the entity that we call a chariot was inherently established, an identifiable entity should undoubtedly be found through the sevenfold analysis; but it is not. The chariot is therefore only an idea entertained when one is under the influence of the cataracts of ignorance, and has no inherent existence.’ Gaining certainty about this, the yogi will access the reality of things with ease. The word still (api), emphasises that the relative is not infringed upon, but when left unanalysed is accepted as real according to consensus.206 Those who are wise will undoubtedly accept this position, seeing that it is flawless and serves great benefit.
It might be interjected, ‘Though the yogi does not perceive a chariot, there is a perception of the mere collection of its parts.’207 To explain: It is quite comical for someone to be scouring for yarn amongst the ashes of burnt wool. The chariot has no existence, and without An owner of the parts, its parts cannot exist. ‘If the chariot is disassembled, wouldn’t one still perceive a pile consisting of its wheels and so forth? How can you then claim that, “…without an owner of the parts, its parts cannot exist”?’ That is not so. It is only when the perceiver’s understanding is related to a chariot that the wheels and other such parts will be thought of as a chariot, and not when the cognition is different, in which case the wheels and so forth may themselves be understood as possessors of parts on the basis of their own constituents. When wheels and so forth have no relationship at all to a chariot, they will not be thought of as parts of a chariot. This point may further be understood through the following example: Like parts that vanish when a chariot is burnt, Are parts whose owner has been scorched by reason’s flames. (6.161) For example, when the part-possessing chariot is burnt, its parts too are certainly consumed. In a similar way, when the rubbing of the sticks of analysis produces the fire of reason which consumes things into imperceptibility, and the chariot is thus burnt to the point of intangibility, since the parts too become fuel for the fires of reason and will certainly be burnt, they do not retain their identity.
And just as the analytical consideration of a chariot that establishes it as a dependent imputation, allows one not to infringe upon the relative truth, and allows yogis to easily access the actual reality of things: Just so the world at large agrees the self is based Upon the aggregates, the elements and on The sense fields, it is what assimilates these things. Just as the chariot is imputed in relation to the wheels and so forth, where the assimilated are the wheels and other parts and the assimilator is the chariot, the self assimilates the five aggregates, the six elements and six sense fields, as the self is imputed in relation to the aggregates and so forth. This is saying that, just as a chariot is the assimilation of the wheels and so forth, the self is likewise the assimilation of the aggregates and so forth. And just as this classification of the assimilated and the assimilator is a worldly convention, the classification of the roles of acted and actor is accepted in a similar fashion to the chariot. To explain: Assimilation is the act and actor too. (6.162) This presentation is saying that the assimilation (upadāna) is the act in the sense of the aggregates and so forth, and the actor in the sense of the self.
If dependent imputations are related to correctly, they will not encourage ideas such as those of constancy or inconstancy, and concepts such as permanence, impermanence and so forth will easily be avoided. To express this: It is not real, thus not a constant entity, Is not inconstant, has no birth and no decay. Such qualities as permanence do not apply. It’s not the same, nor something that is quite distinct. (6.163) This self which is imputed in relation to the aggregates is not a constant thing, nor is it inconstant. If the self were inconstant, this would contradict the Treatise where it states: The assimilated, which arise And cease to be, are not the self. How indeed could the assimilated Become that which assimilates.208 And: Something cannot come from nothing. Unwanted consequences would ensue: The self would be something produced, And though arisen, would not have a cause.209 Therefore, if the aggregates were the self, it would then arise and cease, yet it is not held to be something arising and ceasing. It would therefore make sense to draw the conclusion that the aggregates are not the self. It is hence not tenable that it is something inconstant. That it is constant is just as untenable, as it is stated: It is not tenable to say That it existed in times past. What took place in former lives Is not identical to this. One may think, ‘That was myself,’ But the assimilated was different then. And what indeed is your own self Apart from what is assimilated.210 When saying it has no birth and no decay, this is indicative of the statement the Master made about these two qualities when giving the unwanted consequence that, ‘It would be appearing and disappearing.’211 And concerning the line such qualities as permanence do not apply, as the Master states when considering the self through the analysis of the Tathāgata: How could there in this peace Be the four of permanence and so forth? How could there in this peace Be the four of finiteness and so forth? He who grasps the gross idea That the Tathāgata exists, Has the idea that when transcended He will no longer exist. But being empty of inherent nature It does not make sense to think That he is existent or non-existent When having passed beyond.212 It is not the same, nor is it something quite distinct from the aggregates. As stated: If the self were the aggregates, It would be appearing and disappearing. If it was different from the aggregates, It would not have the aggregates’ characteristics.213 Similarly: Fuel is not the same as the fire. …214 And why can one not entertain these ideas of constancy and so forth in relation to the self? Because, as it says, it is not real. If the self were by nature a real entity, ideas such as constancy and so forth could be relevant to it. But the self cannot have any of these since it does not exist. As stated in a sutra: Four imperishable dharmas Are taught by the World Protector: Beings, space, the awakening mind, As well as the Buddha qualities. If these were substantial They would be considered perishable. But being non-existent they do not perish, And are therefore called imperishable.215
The sevenfold analysis demonstrates that there is not something either permanent or impermanent. But for those failing to see its non-existence, ignorance leads to the belief in its existence, and this view of identity which clings to the idea, ‘This is me,’ keeps them circling in cyclic existence. This self – the sense of ego that is always felt By every kind of being, and the sense of ‘mine’ Which is all that relates to it – confusion spawns As customary fact when left unanalysed. (6.164) After searching for it and finding through reasoning that it is unfeasible, the tīrthikas who are mistaken about its nature, believe it to be distinct from the aggregates. Those of our own side, when fooled by the idea that the self cannot exist separate from the aggregates, assert that the self is just the aggregates themselves. But those having an unmistaken understanding of the Tathāgata’s teachings will think that this is not how it is, and that the self is free from this type of thinking in all ways.216 They understand that in all the states of being associated with ignorance – humans, spirits, animals and so forth – a sense of self is constantly present, and that influenced by this labelling, anything or anyone related with it, associated with it – whether internal entities such as eyes, or external things – become encompassed by the idea of ownership. This self is not established in and of itself but comes about through lack of understanding.
Because confusion is the cause of this conventional designation despite such thing existing, yogis do not apprehend anything whatsoever, and not apprehending eyes and so forth will neither have any grasping towards them. And as yogis apprehend nothing possessing inherent reality, they are liberated from cyclic existence. As stated: When the ideas of ‘I’ and ‘mine’ Whether inner or outer cease, Grasping is halted, and as that ends There ceases to be further births.217 But how is it that ownership cannot occur without a self? To explain this it was stated: Without a maker there is nothing made, And thus without an ‘I’ there is no ‘mine.’ And with the view that ‘I’ and ‘mine’ are void, It’s liberation that the yogis reach. (6.165) Just as without a potter there a pot cannot come to be, without an ‘I’ there can be no ‘mine.’ Therefore, as they do not apprehend ‘I’ and ‘mine,’ yogis have no cyclic perception and reach liberation. Without apprehending forms and so forth, attachment and other emotional involvement with these will not occur, and by this hearers and solitary buddhas are established in transcendence without any further existences. Bodhisattvas however, although they have seen selflessness, will out of compassion maintain their link with existence until awakening. Wise individuals should therefore examine this presentation of selflessness well.
To add that, in the same way that the analysis of the chariot relates to the imputation of the self and what it assimilates, it is applicable to all other things as well: A pot, a blanket, straw mats, armies, woods, a necklace, or a tree, A house, a cart, a cottage, or else anything that it may be These are not found to exist in any of the seven ways when subjected to the analysis of the chariot. And here it may be added: and yet, according to general consensus they exist. And other types of things of similar sort: Should likewise be acknowledged as they’re generally made out to be, … just as consensus thinks they are without analysing. And why? Because the Mighty Sage would not with normal people disagree. (6.166) As stated in the scriptures: The world may quarrel with me, but I have no quarrel with the world.218 One should thus not discredit the general consensus of the world.
‘So how does the world designate things as conventions?’ To explain this it is said: The parts and whole, the traits and qualified, the wish and he who wants, The features, featured, fuel and fire, and all pairs like these are when Examined like the cart shown to exist in none of seven ways. And yet, according to the general consensus they exist. (6.167) Just as a pot is the whole while clay and so forth are its parts; the pot is the qualified while the dark pattern of flames and so forth are traits; and the pot is the featured, while its features are being pot-bellied, having a spout, a long neck and so forth. This similarly applies to blankets and so forth. To wish is to have a craving. He who wants is the support for the wish. Fire is that which burns; fuel that which is burnt. It’s based on the parts that a whole is imputed, and based on the whole that parts are imputed, as in the example of the chariot. So too with the rest, including fire in relation to the fuel, and fuel in relation to fire. These are worldly conventions that cannot be subjected to analysis.
To explain that not only are such things, parts and so forth, established only in mutual dependence, even causes and effects are mutually dependent: Because… A cause will only be a cause when there’s a product it has made. If it does not produce results, it lacks that which makes it a cause. Results will likewise only come about when there exists a cause. This should be understood as saying that, in the case of cause and result too, it is only when there is one that there is the other. Causes and results do not have any inherent existence. And if you dare to presume that these two are established in and of themselves, then… my word! So tell me then, which one derives from which? Which is the first to come? (6.168) Is it the cause or the result which precedes the other, and from which is either the cause or the result then made? Among them, is the cause or the result the first? Understand therefore that cause and result are relative imputations alike unto the chariot, and not inherently real.
Furthermore, if a cause really produces a result, is there contact or not when it is produced? For instance, If you suggest that there is contact when a cause makes a result, Then they’re a single force; the maker and result are not distinct. If they’re apart, non-causes are not different from what is the cause. Discarding these two options there’s no other notion possible. (6.169) If the cause and result connect during production, as they connect they are one, just as there is no difference in the water when a river meets the ocean. And as one cannot then differentiate between them by saying, ‘This is the cause; that is the result,’ what is then produced by what? If they do not meet during production, just as other non-results are not produced when there is no meeting, its result should likewise not be produced when there is no meeting. But if there is production without contact, then anything can be produced. For someone who claims that there are inherent causes and results, it is not possible to come up with a third option other than the product and the producer either being in contact or not, and the only conclusion must therefore be that there is no inherently real causal production.
Therefore, But if your cause produces no result, results do not exist. And when causes do not produce results, there are no results, which means that: And causes that have no results are not as causes justified. It is the causal function of giving rise to results that makes it a cause. If there were causes even in the absence of results, the causal quality of the cause would then not have anything to do with causality, which can’t be accepted. Causes and results cannot therefore be inherently existent. ‘So how do you suggest it is then?’ But since these two are both just like illusions I am not at faultIn granting that the factual things of worldly life can still appear. (6.170) In the case of distinctively characterised entities produced and their producers, this analysis will apply. If, however, it is the case that the production of things is a mistaken imputation, their nature being as unarisen as illusions, and even though unreal they can still be conceptual objects like things such as the hairs appearing to one with cataracts, these considerations are not relevant. The faults mentioned above will not then apply to me, and the things of the world, existing as they are if left unanalysed, remain accounted for.
At this some may reply: ‘You will be liable to the same criticism as when saying that cause and result must either be in contact or not during production. How so?’ ‘Does your critique make contact with the criticised, or does it not? This may be asked, and aren’t you then accountable to this same fault?’ ‘If, during these critical remarks, the criticism makes contact with the criticised, there will be the same problem. And equally so if it does not make contact. Discarding these two options there is no other notion possible.’‘ Thus, as your criticism does not have the power to discredit the criticised, your criticism itself is discredited, and as a matter of course the reality of causes and results are then established. To express this point:’ ‘As what you say will only serve to quash the view you hold yourself, Your criticism lacks the power to discredit what you aim.’ (6.171)
‘Furthermore, ‘Because your cavilling is subject to the self-same consequence And your denial of existent things is quite unreasonable, Insightful persons will not be convinced by what you have to say. You argue just to quarrel and have no position of your own.’ (6.172) ‘That your cavilling is subject to the self-same consequence has already been mentioned. That your denial of existent things is quite unreasonable shall now be explained. How to respond to the argument that things that are equally not in contact do not produce anything? A magnet will exert a pull on metals close to it without touching them, but not on all. And eyes can see forms within their scope without touching them, but not all. Similarly, even though causes can produce things without contact, that does not mean that everything not in contact with it will be produced. Also, you’re arguing just to quarrel: to argue just to refute others’ position without presenting any position of your own, is to argue just to quarrel. And you don’t have any position of your own, because your own presentation is made purely to refute the position of others.’
To this we reply: To claim that it’s an issue whether this critique makes contact with The criticised or not while criticising will only apply To those thinking in absolutes, but we do not endorse a stance, And therefore this unwanted consequence does not apply to us. (6.173) Concerning the statement because your cavilling is subject to the self-same consequence; it is not in fact the case that this consequence applies equally to ourselves, because in our point of view the critique does not make contact with the criticised while criticising, nor does it not make contact, since neither the critique nor the criticised are inherently established. Do not therefore entertain the idea that there must be either contact or not. As stated: […]: … Venerable Subhūti. Does the attainment when not yet attained already exist as something, or does it not? Subhūti replied: Venerable Śāriputra. I do not think the attainment when not yet attained already exists as something, nor that it does not already exist as something. Śāriputra said: But, venerable Subhūti, is there then no attainment and no realisation? Subhūti replied: Venerable Śāriputra, there is both attainment and realisation, but not in a dualistic manner. Attainment and realisation are worldly conventions, venerable Śāriputra. The stream-enterer, once-returner, non-returner, arhat, solitary buddha and bodhisattva are worldly conventions, but ultimately there is neither attainment nor realisation.219 Here, that the attainment attained can exist or not exist as something is refuted as duality would be a consequence, and duality is unreasonable for a non-entity, so attainment is accepted as a worldly convention when not analysed. Similarly, although the criticised and the critique neither connect nor do not connect, there can still be the convention of the critique discrediting the criticised.
Also, As when the features of the sun being eclipsed Are also seen in its reflected silhouette, That sun and likeness meet or not is ludicrous, It happens in dependence, just conventionally. (6.174)
Although unreal, it helps us beautify our face. Just so, these arguments that have the power to Refine the face of wisdom can’t be verified. And still, know that the proof they give is realised. (6.175) What we call a reflection is not real in the slightest, so it is neither here nor there to think that it must occur in contact with the disc of the sun or not. And still, with a certain proximity to the form, one will certainly have the perception of the reflection as expected. It is the same with the critique that is empty of inherent existence but can still discredit the criticised, and the argument which is empty of inherence and can’t be verified, but can still prove what it sets out to prove. One should take from this that our own words are not subject to the self-same consequence, since it does not follow that there is a duality. Since it is the very visage of wisdom itself, it is referred to as the face of wisdom. To refine it means to make it immaculate by removing ignorance. That they have the power to means that this power or ability is seen in them. Since claiming that there is this duality does not make sense to those for whom it is an imputation, they will not be able to harm the Middle Way in any way whatsoever with critiques and replies based on this duality. As Āryadeva states: However long one may attempt One cannot pinpoint any fault In he who holds to neither stance: ‘It is’, ‘is not’, ‘is both’, or ‘none.’220 Likewise: When the argument is emptiness And someone offers a reply, It’s just like no reply at all As it assumes what’s being proved.221 This also clarifies the case of productive causes. Some222 , however, will suggest that the Middle Way Treatise is here dealing specifically with productive causes and not with rhetorics, that the conflicts involved in contact versus non-contact apply to rhetorical causality and not productivity, and that this is why we are not guilty of making spurious arguments.223 But this will not suffice as a reply. One will not find the opponent very amiable when saying things that are so encumbered by problematic issues, and since rhetorics are alike to productivity in having such issues, this in an insufficient reply. Also, in their attempt to deflect the accusation of spurious reasoning they use the arguments they themselves accept to prove the assertions of the Treatise, only ending up at the receiving end of critiques made by opponents. This is what makes our own replies all the more elegant.
Furthermore, Yes, if the reason used as proof were something real, And real also the thing that we attempt to prove, The argument of contact would be relevant. Since it’s not so you’re only troubling yourself. (6.176) You’re pointlessly wearing yourself out on our behalf by arraying the faults of a flawed position against a flawless position. For example, if someone has cataracts and sees hairs, discrediting that there are just one, or are many, that they are long, circular, black or the like, will have no effect on those with the disease. And it is the same when in the analysis of causes and results that have no inherent existence your criticism is based in dualism – it will have no effect. Understand therefore that the examples presented here, of there being activity without contact – such as the eyes, the magnet and so forth – are disproved, as the same consequence applies to them.
You give up the straight path of non-inherence for the windy road of philosophical speculation. Applying your atrocious conceptual handiwork, you gladly block the authentic route. Why make such immense trouble for yourself?! Furthermore, That all things lack reality we show with ease. But it’s no easy matter for our challenger To demonstrate how things exist inherently. Why tax the world with webs of shoddy pedantry? (6.177) To back up our position we use the examples of dreams, illusions and so forth, and are thus able to bring about an understanding that the things of the world lack inherent existence. But it is not as easy to demonstrate the idea that things have inherent existence, because there are no examples for that which are agreed upon by both of us. This being the case, we can repel any argument while none can provide adequate replies. Is there anyone who is encouraging you to continue this disservice to the world? The afflicted world is like a silkworm trapped in the cocoon of its own concepts, so why add to that by stringing a tight web around it using the cords of shoddy pedantry? So give up this squabbling! Things are like reflections, and there are no such things as particular or universal characteristics, so what does it matter whether it’s direct perception or inference? There is only one direct perception when it comes down to it, and that is the wisdom of omniscience.
Also, If having grasped the prior points, now please forget This extra censure, that of touch, expressly made. It wasn’t just for frivolous wrangling this was said, But so that such additional points are recognised. (6.178) When further types of criticism are already understood from the arguments directed at the opposing side using the principles of interdependence and dependent imputation, one should avoid replying to those who ask, ‘Does the cause make contact with the result during production, or not?’, with this criticism. The purpose of the Treatise is to counteract conceptions, and since our point has already been made, why should the Treatise be used to further frivolous wrangling (vitaṇḍa)?224 We are not here eliminating the others’ positions, because there are no real things to be eliminated. So how can this be frivolous wrangling? According to how frivolous wrangling is defined, the proper definition of it involves someone establishing their own position while refuting the position of others, which means that the definition of frivolous wrangling is not met in any way whatsoever. Similar additional criticisms may be understood from this point.
The selflessness of phenomena is clarified in the verses beginning, ‘It can’t come from itself …’ (6.8), until the verse ending with, ‘Analytical reasoning provides swift liberation’ (6.119). The selflessness of the person is dealt with from the verse beginning, ‘They see how each and every affliction and fault originates with the view of identity’ (6.120), until this point. To indicate this and express the classifications of emptiness, it was said: That beings may be freed, this selflessness was taught In two ways, of phenomena and personal. In short, this selflessness was taught as being of two types: phenomenal selflessness and personal selflessness. Why was selflessness presented in these two ways? As it says, that beings may be freed: the Illustrious One presented these two types of selfless in order to liberate beings. The selflessness of the person is taught in order that solitary buddhas and hearers may be liberated, while both are taught in order that bodhisattvas may be liberated through attaining the state of omniscience. Although hearers and solitary buddhas do come to see the mere conditionality of dependent arising, they do not have a complete practice of the selflessness of phenomena, but only the means of abandoning the afflictions experienced in the three realms. It is explained that they do have a comprehensive practice of the selflessness of the person. And to his followers our Teacher taught the same By classifying it in various different ways. (6.179) Apart from this twofold classification of selflessness, the Illustrious One also taught it in many other ways to suit the various inclinations of his students.
Concerning these, When emptiness is taught elaborately It is of sixteen types, and when condensed It is of four types – this is the approach Adopted in the Greater Vehicle. (6.180) The sixteen emptinesses are taught in the statement: Furthermore, Subhūti, the Greater Vehicle of the bodhisattva is the following: emptiness of the internal, emptiness of the external, emptiness of the external internal, emptiness of emptiness, emptiness of immensity, emptiness of the ultimate, emptiness of the compounded, emptiness of the uncompounded, emptiness of the boundless, emptiness of no beginning or end, emptiness of what should not be spurned, emptiness of true nature, emptiness of all phenomena, emptiness of defining characteristics, emptiness of the unobservable and emptiness of real non-things.225 And after that the four types of emptiness are taught: Furthermore, Subhūti, things are empty of things. Non-things are empty of non-things. Self-nature is empty of self-nature. A nature beyond is empty of a nature beyond.226 These emptinesses are what we call the Greater Vehicle. Neither emptiness nor non-emptiness exist even in the slightest. These are nothing more than relative conventions, just like form and so forth, useful when instructing individuals. As the Treatise states: If anything at all could be non-empty, There could be something that is empty. But as there is nothing at all that is not empty, How could the empty then be?227 One should not declare ‘empty,’ ‘Not empty,’ ‘both,’ Nor ‘neither’ – these are just Nominal designations.228
Now, in terms the emptiness of the internal, it was said: This being what their nature is, The eye is empty of the eye – The same is true for ears and nose, For tongue, for body and the mind. (6.181)
They neither last nor disappear. Hence all these six, the eyes and such, Possess no nature of their own. This is the inner emptiness. (6.182) To give a brief quote: Which internal things are indicated by the emptiness of the internal? The eyes, ears, nose tongue, body and mind are the internal. These do not constantly remain, nor do they disappear; eye is therefore empty of eye. Why? Because that is its nature.229 For things to constantly remain230 would mean they wouldn’t lose their nature. Since they also remain for time a before changing, it is stated that they ‘don’t just disappear.’ As these statements show, any entity having a nature would by necessity be neither constantly remaining nor simply disappearing. As stated: A true nature originating due to causes And conditions, is not tenable. A true nature coming from causes And conditions would be fabricated. And how could it be acceptable to say That a true nature is something created? A true nature cannot be something created, And cannot not rely on anything else.231 One may ask whether a nature as specified by the Master in the Treatise exists as it is asserted by the Master? As the Illustrious One taught it: Whether the tathāgatas appear or not, the nature of reality remains the same. When it says the nature of reality, whatsoever that may be, it is the nature of the eyes and so forth. And what is their nature? It is that which is unfabricated and not reliant on others, the nature itself that is realised by a mind that is free from the cataracts of ignorance. And if one asks whether this is something existent or non-existent? If it doesn’t exist, for what purpose do the bodhisattvas practice the path of the perfections? It is precisely in order to realise this reality of things that the bodhisattvas undergo all of these immense hardships. As is stated: O son of good family. The ultimate does not arise, does not cease, does not disappear, does not come, does not go, and cannot be expressed in words. It cannot be put into words and cannot be conceptualised. The ultimate, O son of good family, is something ineffable known through the discriminative wisdom of noble ones who are at peace. The ultimate, O son of good family, is unaffected by whether tathāgatas appear or not; by whether bodhisattvas shave off their hair and beards, don the saffron robes, leave householder life with genuine faith and go forth into homelessness for the sake of it; nor after having gone forth by their degree of diligence they demonstrate, as if their hair or robes were on fire, in order to attain this reality of things. If, son of good family, the ultimate did not exist, a life of purity would be meaningless, and it would be pointless for the tathāgatas to appear. Since the ultimate exists, bodhisattvas can be said to be knowledgeable about the ultimate.232
Some might react to this, saying, ‘My word! Not agreeing that it is anything at all, and still professing it to be a nature that is an accidental unfabricated something that does not rely on anything else; your assertions are completely contradictory!’ Let me explain. You haven’t understood the point the Treatise is making. Its intent is this: If the interdependently arisen nature of the eyes and so forth was of the nature that immature beings perceive them to be, that nature would be something mistakenly understood, and a life of purity would then be meaningless. But since this is not its real nature, to find out what that is, a life of purity has meaning. It is from the perspective of the relative that we express it to be unfabricated and not dependent on anything else. And this, which immature beings cannot see, is considered the nature. And being in that fashion, the ultimate is neither an existent thing nor a non-existent thing, since it is by nature pacified. And the Master does not only assert this nature for himself, but as this point can potentially be convincing to others, this nature is presented as something provable to both parties. Some say that the nature of something like fire is that it is hot and so forth, but this is completely unacceptable, because in being interdependently arisen it is something artificial and reliant. It does not make sense to say that since it is something existent it does not have artifice and is not reliant on something else, because when there is a relationship of attributes it is not something with any conclusive reality, and such aspects have relevance on the relative level. But enough digression. We shall now return to the main topic. By saying that the eyes and so forth are empty of being eyes and so forth, their emptiness of a true nature has been made clear. It is not an emptiness of one thing being empty of another, as if saying that the eye is empty because it has no inner creator, or is empty of a real dualism of subject and object.
As for emptiness of the external: This being how their nature is, A form is empty of a form. And this is true of sound and smell, Taste, texture and phenomena. (6.183)
That form and such are nature-less, This is the outer emptiness. As stated: What is emptiness of the external? What we call external phenomena are forms … [and so forth]. These do not remain constantly nor do they disappear, and form is therefore empty of form, because that is its nature.233 That what is both is nature-less, Is outer-inner emptiness. (6.184) As stated: That external internal phenomena have no inherent nature as external internal phenomena, is what we call external internal emptiness. …234
That everything is nature-less Is what the wise term emptiness. This voidness too is empty of A nature which is emptiness. (6.185)
The voidness of the void is termed The emptiness of emptiness. And this was taught to stop the mind That clings to emptiness as real. (6.186) As stated: What is the emptiness of emptiness? The emptiness of emptiness is the emptiness which is empty of the emptiness that is all phenomena’s emptiness.235 This was taught to counteract the clinging of those who believe emptiness to be something real. As stated: To defeat all conceptual ideas You taught the nectar of emptiness. But you severely reproached those Who ended up clinging to that.236
The universe and all that live Pervade throughout; it’s infinite Just like the four immeasurables; Hence the immensity of space. (6.187) The worlds of the beings and the environment are not found anywhere other than in the directions of space, which means space completely pervades all that live. The directions of space are therefore immense. When meditating on love and so forth one does so through extending it throughout the directions, which serves as an example for the immeasurability of the directions, showing how boundless it is, and therefore immense.
The emptiness of space with ten Directions is the emptiness Of the immensity, thus taught To block thoughts of immensity. (6.188) As stated: What is the emptiness of immensity? The eastern direction is empty of the eastern direction. …237 The emptiness of immensity was taught to counteract belief in the immensity of space for those who think space is immeasurable. The Vaiśeṣikas do consider the directions of space to be something substantial in this way.
Nirvana is the ultimate Because it is the highest goal. That that is empty of itself Is voidness of the ultimate. (6.189)
To counter all conceptions of Nirvana being something real, The Knower of the Ultimate Taught voidness of the ultimate. (6.190) As stated: What is the emptiness of the ultimate? The ultimate refers to nirvana. Since it neither constantly remains nor disappears, nirvana is empty of nirvana. …238 This was taught to counteract the clinging of those who believe nirvana to be something real. The word parama239 denotes the objective or that which is to be understood.
The three realms are declared to be Compounded – from conditions born. That they are empty of themselves Is voidness of compounded things. (6.191) As stated: What is emptiness of the compounded? The compounded refers to the three realms. The desire realm is empty of the desire realm. …240
The uncompounded is that which Does not abide, remain or cease. That that is empty of itself: The uncompounded’s emptiness. (6.192) The words of itself, refer to the uncompounded. As stated: What is the emptiness of the uncompounded? The uncompounded refers to that which does not arise, cease, disintegrate, or remain and then transform. That which is uncompounded is empty of the uncompounded. …241
When limits have no relevance, We say that it transcends all bounds. That that is empty of itself Is emptiness of boundless things. (6.193) As stated: What is the emptiness of the boundless? Bounds refers to the extremes of eternalism and nihilism, and what has no such bounds is boundless. The boundless is empty of the boundless. …242
With no first start or final end Samsara is beginningless And endless; no migration there, It’s like existence in a dream. (6.194)
That this is empty of itself Is called the emptiness of no Beginning and no end; and this The Treatise clearly explicates. (6.195) As stated: What is the emptiness of no beginning or end? Where there is neither beginning nor end, there is no middle. And where there is no beginning, end or middle, there is no coming and going. As this neither constantly remains nor disappears, the beginning, end and middle is empty of a beginning, end and middle. …243 Beginning means a start. End means a conclusion.
To spurn denotes that one rejects Or casts aside. And there’s one thing That one must not let go of, that Should not be spurned or left aside. (6.196)
The fact that what should not be spurned Is likewise empty of itself, Is what is called the emptiness Of that which never should be spurned. (6.197) As stated: What is the emptiness of that not be spurned? To spurn means to reject, cast aside, or let go of. What should not be spurned is empty of what should not be spurned. …244 To spurn means to give something up, and not to spurn something means to never give it up.245
The essence of compounded things And so forth aren’t created by Disciples, solitary ones, The victor’s heirs, tathāgatas. (6.198)
The essence of compounded things Is therefore termed their true nature. That that is empty of itself Is emptiness of true nature. (6.199) As stated: What is the emptiness of the true nature. The true nature of all phenomena is not made, it is not created. It is not made up by the hearers. …246
The eighteen dhātus, senses six, Sensations that arise from them, All things material and not, All things compounded and what’s not; (6.200)
All such phenomena are void, Are empty of any such things. And this is the emptiness of all phenomena. As stated: What is the emptiness of all phenomena? All phenomena includes compounded things, uncompounded things, [and so forth] …247 The eighteen dhātus refers to the six inner sense fields, the six outer, and the sixfold consciousness group. The six senses refer to visual perception and the others, up to and including mental perception. The six senses result in six types of sensations. And all these phenomena are empty of all phenomena. ‘What can appear,’ such marks aren’t real: The voidness of defining marks. (6.201)
What then are the defining characteristics of form and so forth? To give a detailed presentation: A form is ‘that which can appear.’ A feeling is ‘experience.’ Perception is ‘to grasp at marks.’ Formations are ‘created things.’ (6.202)
‘To recognise specific things’ Is what defines our consciousness. The skandhas’ mark is suffering, The dhātus are a deadly snake. (6.203) The dhātus have the defining characteristics of being like a poisonous snake in terms of how the harm is similar.
The sense fields, so the Buddha said, Facilitate development. The reason being that they facilitate the arising or development of suffering. Things that arise dependently Are marked by a collectiveness. (6.204) The defining characteristic of dependent arising is collectiveness (sāmagrī), because dependent arising is distinguished as a collective.
To give marks generosity, While painlessness is discipline. To not be vexed is tolerance, And flawlessness is diligence. (6.205) The reason being that diligence is characterised by perfectly upholding virtue.
Absorption is collectedness. The reason being that it gathers all positive things. Not clinging marks intelligence. The reason being that progression towards nirvana involves not clinging at all. And so the six perfections are Described by their defining marks. (6.206)
The dhyānas, the immeasurables, As well as all the formless realms, Were taught by he who knew them well To be unagitated states. (6.207) The Illustrious One taught that these are defined by the lack of any vexation, since they are attained by abandoning anger.
The thirty-seven factors of Awakening can ‘bring one forth.’ That they bring one forth, means that one is brought forth to liberation. Since they are the causes for transcending samsara, they have the ability to make one depart. They are therefore things that bring one forth, and their characteristic feature is that they help one attain liberation. The dhyānas and so forth were already explained.248 The character of emptiness Is absence of a reference point. (6.208) Not perceiving entities as real, one will not be soiled by the stains of concepts, and this is why the liberating door of emptiness as characterised by an absence.
The featureless is peacefulness. The third: no pain or ignorance. The liberating door of featurelessness (animitta) is characterised by peace, as there is no apprehension of features. The third refers to the liberating door of no expectancy (apraṇihita). The liberating door of no expectancy is characterised by a lack of suffering and confusion. Since one does not deliberately seek to investigate the nature of compounded suffering, nor expect to understand the nature of compounded phenomena through intelligence, the third liberating door is characterised by a lack of suffering and confusion. The liberations are defined As that by which one is set free. (6.209) The eight liberations are as follows: The first liberation is for the embodied to consider forms. The second is to let go of249 the idea of subjective form, and then consider external forms. The third is to liberate the pleasant and involves the fourth absorption (dhyāna). The four formless states are as has been stated.250 The eight is the cessation of perception and feeling. Since these liberations free one from the obscurations of the states of equilibrium, they are characterised as something that can set one free.
The powers are described as what Delivers utter certainty. The ten powers, which shall later be explained, are characterised by giving one utter certainty. Since with utter certainty one can be characterised as undisputed, they are called the powers. The Buddha’s confidences are In essence firm security. (6.210) The four types of self-confidence are as follows: (1) ’When having declared, “I have reached full and complete awakening,” there will be no occasion when anyone – no ascetics, brahmins, gods, demons, or even Brahma – can reasonably challenge me by saying, “Oh no, you have not come to a full and complete realisation of all phenomena,” [and so forth].’ (2) ‘… “O, I have exhausted the defilements,” … “Oh no, you have not exhausted the defilements,” [and so forth].’ (3) ‘When following the teachings I have given about what the impediments are, there is no grounds for the claim, “these are not impediments,” [and so forth].’ (4) ‘If one dedicates oneself to the noble path of deliverance that I have taught, one will eliminate suffering and find deliverance, and there are no grounds for the claim, “one will not eliminate suffering and find deliverance,“ [and so forth.]’251 These are characterised by a firm security, since no one at all is able to alter this.
The perfect knowledge is defined By boundless eloquence and such. The perfect understandings, yet to be explained, are characterised by being unceasing. Through great love one accomplishes The benefit of sentient beings. (6.211) The characteristic feature of great love is to be of benefit.
Through great compassion one protects Those suffering. … The characteristic feature of great compassion is to save beings who are suffering. … Rejoicing is To feel delight. … The characteristic feature of rejoicing is to feel delight. … Non-prejudice Defines impartiality. (6.212) The characteristic feature of impartiality is to be free from attachment, aversion and so forth.
The eighteen special qualities Unique to Buddha cannot from The Teacher be erased; they are Defined as irremovable. (6.213) The Buddha has eighteen unique qualities: Subhūti, from the moment the Tathāgata fully realises the most supreme perfect and complete awakening and up until his final nirvana, the Tathāgata does not (1) make mistakes, (2) rash utterances, (3) forget things, or (4) lose his mental composure. (5) He does not harbour discriminating ideas, but (6) his equanimity is not indifference. (7) He does not lose his dedication, (8) diligence, (9) awareness, (10) concentration, (11) intelligence, or (12) freedom. (13) All his physical activities are preceded by wisdom and followed through with wisdom. (14) All his verbal activities are preceded by wisdom and followed through with wisdom. (15) All his mental activities are preceded by wisdom and followed through with wisdom. (16) His vision of wisdom has unimpeded access to the past, (17) the future and (18) the present.252 The characteristic feature of these eighteen unique qualities of the Buddha is that they are irremovable; since he does not make mistakes and so forth, there is no way that one can find any fault with him.
An explanation of these can be found in the noble Questions of Dharaṇīśvara Sutra: Furthermore, O son of good family, the Tathāgata is without physical errors that can reasonably be criticised, whether by fools or the wise. How so? The illustrious buddhas have no physical errors. When looking ahead and all around, when bending and extending as he walks, in wearing the upper, lower and outer robe, and when holding the alms bowl, he carries himself with grace during the four activities. When entering and leaving cities, towns and villages his feet do not touch the ground, but thousand-spoked wheels appear and sweet-smelling lotuses spring forth, upon which the Tathāgata steps. Any beings born as animals which happen to step in the Tathāgata’s footprint, will experience bliss for seven days, and when they die be reborn among the gods. Although the robes are not in contact with even four inches of the Tathāgata’s body, even a howling wind cannot ruffle it. The radiance of his body reaches down to the beings of the Incessant hell, filling them with bliss. Thus it is said that the Tathāgata has no physical fault. The Tathāgata is without verbal errors that can reasonably be criticised, whether by fools or the wise. How so? Son of good family. The Tathāgata speaks timely, speaks when appropriate, speaks authentically, and acts in accordance with his words. His expressions are well formulated. His words are pleasing to all beings. What he says is not repetitive. His words are elegant in expression and meaning. Each moment of his speech is satisfying to all beings. Thus it is said that the Tathāgata is without verbal error. The Tathāgata is without mental errors that can reasonably be criticised, whether by fools or the wise. How so? He does not stray from his equipoise but carries out all buddha-activities without needing to focus his attention on them, and sees everything with his unimpeded wisdom. Thus it is said that the Tathāgata is without mental error. And just as he is without mental faults, so he teaches sentient beings the Dharma to remove every fault. This is the fifteenth tathāgata-activity of the Tathāgata.253 This is the first unique quality of the Buddha.
Furthermore, O son of good family, the Tathāgata does not make any rash utterances that can be censured by Māra, Māra’s divine entourage, or tīrthikas. How so? The Tathāgata does not make any rash utterances himself or as a reply. Why? The Tathāgata is without attachment and aversion. Even if honoured by all sentient beings he does not think highly of himself. Even if he is not honoured by any sentient beings he does not feel disheartened. The Tathāgata does not utter any sounds of regret whether his work is laborious or does not go as intended. The Tathāgata is not in conflict with anyone in the world and does not therefore make any rash utterances. The Tathāgata is in a state free from the afflictions, feels no ownership, does not hold on, does not grasp, but is free from all entanglements. Thus the Tathāgata is without rash utterances. And just as he is without rash utterances, so he teaches sentient beings the Dharma to avoid all rash utterances. This is the sixteenth tathāgata-activity of the Tathāgata.254 This is the second unique quality of the Buddha.
Furthermore, O son of good family, the Tathāgata is not unmindful in a way that makes him unclear about anything at all. How so? The Tathāgata is not absent-minded in his meditative absorptions, liberations, concentrations, or states of equilibrium. The Tathāgata observes the mental activity and distractions of all sentient beings, and is not inattentive in teaching the Dharma that is suitable to each of them. The Tathāgata is not inattentive about the science of terms, sense, etymology and eloquence. The Tathāgata is never unmindful of the unimpeded wisdom that sees the things of the past, present and future. And just as the Tathāgata is never unmindful, he teaches sentient beings the Dharma so that they may never be unmindful. This is the seventeenth tathāgata-activity of the Tathāgata.255 This is the third unique quality of the Buddha.
Furthermore, O son of good family, the Tathāgata does not lose is mental composure. Whether walking and so forth, he always remains in a most profound state of concentrated equipoise, an untainted meditative absorption. Except with the Tathāgata’s blessing, there is no sentient being, whatever form, whether resting in equipoise or not, who is able to observe the mind of the Tathāgata. And just as the Tathāgata does not lose his mental composure, he teaches sentient beings the Dharma that they may always remain mentally composed. This is the eighteenth tathāgata-activity of the Tathāgata.256 This is the fourth unique quality of the Buddha.
Furthermore, O son of good family, the Tathāgata does not have discriminating ideas that unsettle the mind. How so? Since his domain is as inexhaustible as space, the Tathāgata does not have any discriminating ideas about domains. Since things are by nature selfless, the Tathāgata does not discriminate between sentient beings. Because of the wisdom of inseparability and sameness of the sphere of reality (dharmadhātu), the Tathāgata does not discriminate between buddhas. Since the true reality is freedom from attachment, the Tathāgata does not discriminate between phenomena. The Tathāgata is not biased towards those who uphold moral discipline, upset with those who have a bad character, give benefits to those who provide service, respond with harm to harm-doers, is not reverential towards prospective students,257 and does not have contempt for those who follow wrong ways. The Tathāgata remains balanced in relation to all things. Therefore … (and so forth).258 This is the fifth unique quality of the Buddha.
Furthermore, O son of good family, the Tathāgata’s impartiality is not indifference. How so? The Tathāgata’s impartiality is a practice of the path and not a non-practice of the path. Likewise, the Tathāgata’s impartiality is a practice of intelligence and not a non-practice. The Tathāgata’s impartiality is connected with wisdom, it is supramundane, descend to the level of the mundane…. And just as the great impartiality of the Tathāgata is perfect, he teaches the Dharma to beings so that they may perfect such an impartiality. This is the twentieth tathāgata-activity.259 This is the sixth unique quality of the Buddha.
Furthermore, O son of good family, the Tathāgata does not lose his dedication. What is his dedication? He is dedicated to the ways of virtue. How so? The Tathāgata does not lose his dedication for great love. And likewise does not lose it for great compassion, teaching the Dharma, training beings, helping beings develop, for seclusion, and for helping beings properly undertake awakening. He does not lose his dedication to ensure that the presence of the Three Jewels is not interrupted. The Tathāgata is not driven by dedication; the Tathāgata’s dedication is preceded by wisdom. Therefore … (and so forth).260 This is the seventh unique quality of the Buddha.
Furthermore, O son of good family, the Tathāgata does not lose his diligence. The Tathāgata’s diligence is like this: He is diligent in the sense of not being careless towards beings that should be trained, and never tired in the face of students of the Dharma. If the Tathāgata meets someone who is a fit vessel for the Dharma, who does not become weary from listening to the Dharma, the Tathāgata will remain seated teaching the Dharma, without concern for food. Out of concern for sentient beings, even if there is just a single being to trained by the Buddha, the Tathāgata will traverse as many buddhafields as there are grains of sand in the Ganges, never tiring in body, speech, or mind. The Tathāgata diligently applies himself with serenity of mind, and speaks highly of diligence. He eulogises to sentient beings of that diligence which when properly applied by sentient beings leads to the attainment of the liberation of noble ones. … [and so forth].261 This is the eight unique quality of the Buddha.
Furthermore, O son of good family, the Tathāgata never loses his awareness. How so? The Tathāgata is not distracted. O son of good family, the moment the Tathāgata fully realised unsurpassed true and complete awakening, he understood the minds of all beings of the past, present and future, and is never distracted from this. Although the Tathāgata is acutely aware of the activities of sentient beings, he does not have to exert his wisdom for that purpose. The Tathāgata’s awareness of those being established in the three groups, beings’ engagement with the powers, how beings are motivated and the activities of beings, never wanes. The Tathāgata does not need to recollect, consider, or contemplate when teaching sentient beings the Dharma. His teachings never decline. Why? The Tathāgata never loses his awareness. And just as his own … [and so forth].262 This is the ninth unique quality of the Buddha.
Furthermore, O son of good family, the Tathāgata does not lose his concentration. In the concentration of the Tathāgata all phenomena are equal, they are not unequal, they are just as they are. How is it that the Tathāgata does not lose his concentration? Whatever reality is like, that is what his concentration is like. Whatever his concentration is like, that is what the Tathāgata is like. Hence it is said that he is established in equilibrium. And not being within any of the three realms, there is no deterioration. Hence it is said that the Tathāgata does not lose his concentration. The Tathāgata teaches the Dharma so that all beings may achieve concentration. … [and so forth].263 This is the tenth unique quality of the Buddha.
Furthermore, O son of good family, the Tathāgata does not lose his intelligence. How is his intelligence? His understanding of all phenomena does not depend on someone else. He knows how to teach things to other beings and individuals. Being expert in the sciences, he knows how use language. He knows how to teach so that a single phrase can apply throughout a hundred thousand aeons. His is a knowledge that can eliminate all doubts. It is a knowledge that is not attached to anything. It is knowledge of how to teach to lead someone to the three vehicles. It is a knowledge that completely understands the eighty-four thousand ways of beings’ minds. It is a knowledge of how to teach that which is suitable among the of eighty-four thousand types of teachings. The intelligence of the Tathāgata is taught to be boundless, endless, inexhaustible and immeasurable. Just as it does not deteriorate for the Tathāgata, he teaches the Dharma so that all beings may have inexhaustible intelligence. This is the twenty-fifth tathāgata-activity of the Tathāgata.264 This is the eleventh unique quality of the Buddha.
Furthermore, O son of good family, the Tathāgata’s liberation is never lost. Liberation refers to the liberation of the hearers which is to follow the word; the liberation of the solitary buddhas which is to understand conditions; and the liberation of the buddhas, a liberation through a complete release from all attachment and clinging – unhampered by the past, not continuing into the future and not remaining in the present. It is freedom from thinking in terms of the duality of eye and form. It is freedom from thinking in terms of the duality of ear and so forth, up to and including mind and mental phenomena; being liberated from basing oneself on grasping and clinging. It is knowledge of the natural luminosity of the mind, and that is why it is said that the understanding that takes place within a single moment of mind can lead to the full realisation of unsurpassed true and complete awakening. … [and so forth].265 This is the twelfth unique quality of the Buddha.
Furthermore, O son of good family, all his physical activities are preceded by wisdom and followed through with wisdom. Carrying out certain physical activities the Tathāgata trains beings through his gaze. He trains beings by speaking, remaining silent, eating, religious practices and characteristics. …[and so forth]. There is nothing that the illustrious buddhas do that cannot serve to train beings. … [and so forth].266 This is the thirteenth unique quality of the Buddha.
Furthermore, O son of good family, all the Tathāgata’s verbal activities are preceded by wisdom and followed through with wisdom. How so? The Dharma the Tathāgata teaches brings results, his predictions accurate, his statements well-formulated. The speech of the Tathāgata is comprehensive, instructive, not haughty, not base, not evasive, not stuttering, … [and so forth]. It is as immeasurable as space. It is endowed with the best of all qualities. [Up to this point, the sixty features of melodic voice are enumerated.] O son of good family, such is the voice of the Tathāgata. … [and so forth].267 This is the fourteenth unique quality of the Buddha.
Furthermore, O son of good family, all the Tathāgata’s mental activities are preceded by wisdom and followed through with wisdom. How so? The Tathāgata does not express himself through mind, through intellect, or through consciousness. He is powered by wisdom, governed by wisdom. The wisdom of the Tathāgata can engage with the minds of all sentient beings. … [and so forth]. It is engaged with all phenomena. It has cultivated the steps of the path. Does not rely on others concerning any meditative concentration. It beyond objectification. It is free from causality. It is removed from the three realms. It is free from all demonic influences. […] It is indivisible from the sphere of reality (dharmadhātu). This is how the Tathāgata’s mental activity is preceded by wisdom. This is the twenty-ninth tathāgata-activity of the Tathāgata.268 This is the fifteenth unique Buddha quality.
Furthermore, his vision of wisdom has unimpeded access to the past. No matter how many buddha-fields have appeared and disappeared in the past, he can enumerate them all. He knows each and every blade of grass, bush, herb and tree. No matter how many communities of beings considered sentient there were; no matter how many buddhas appeared; no matter how many teachings each of these buddhas gave; no matter how many were trained in the Hearer Vehicle; and no matter how many were trained in the Greater Vehicle; he knows them all. … [and so forth]. He knows their minds. He is able to recount, through direct perception and inference, which mental states happened prior to which. That the Tathāgata employs his flow of thoughts to the past is perceived.269 With such wisdom the Tathāgata repeatedly teaches the Dharma to sentient beings. … [and so forth].270 This is the sixteenth unique quality of the Buddha.
Furthermore, O son of good family, the Tathāgata’s vision of wisdom has unimpeded access to the future. The Tathāgata knows each and every sentient being, dharma and field that will appear and disappear in the future. … [and so forth]. Without future states of mind being being concealed, he teaches sentient beings the Dharma by looking to the future.271 This is the seventeenth unique quality of the Buddha.
Furthermore, O son of good family, the Tathāgata’s vision of wisdom has unimpeded and unobstructed access to all that occurs in the present. The Tathāgata can enumerate all present buddha-fields in the ten directions. He knows all present buddhas. He likewise knows all bodhisattvas, all hearers and solitary buddhas, … all entities, and can enumerate every minute particle of the earth element there is. He likewise knows and can enumerate every minute drop of water that fits on the tip of a hair, the fire element of flames that ignite and go out, the wind element that makes forms agile, and the whole space element as if filled up with hair-tips. … He likewise knows the realms where beings are born as denizens of hell and so forth… , and the present realms of divine beings. … [and so forth]. And still, the Tathāgata does not harbour any sense of duality, and teaches sentient beings the Dharma that they may not perceive things dualistically. This is the thirty-second tathāgata-activity of the Tathāgata.272 This is the eighteenth unique quality of the Buddha.
Omniscient wisdom is what has Direct perception as a mark. The other is of lesser type, Not as direct perception seen. (6.214)
Whatever the defining marks Of things compounded and things not, They’re empty in and of themselves, Hence voidness of defining marks. (6.215) This concludes the treatment of the emptiness of defining characteristics.
The present instant does not stay, The past and future don’t exist; Because these three cannot be found They are things unobservable. (6.216)
These unobservables are void Of any essence of their own; They neither last nor cease to be – The emptiness of what’s not seen. (6.217) The past has ceased, the future has yet to come, the present does not remain, hence all three are non-existent. That they are unobservable, means that the three times cannot be found anywhere. As stated: As this neither constantly remains nor disappears, the unobservable is empty of the unobservable. How so? Because this is its nature, it is called the emptiness of the unobservable.273
Since things arise conditionally They are not real as composites. That composites are void themselves Is emptiness of real non-things. (6.218) A composite emerges from an assembly, and since it arises from causes and conditions the composite has no real existence. It’s nature is not something real, and its emptiness is the emptiness of real non-things. This concludes the explanation of the elaborate sixteenfold emptiness.
Four further ones shall be mentioned: In short the term a thing is used Referring to five aggregates. As these are empty of themselves, This is the emptiness of things. (6.219) Existent thing refers to the five aggregates. That things are empty of things, as mentioned above, is the emptiness of things.
And non-thing is, to put it short, Implying uncompounded things. That these are empty of non-things, Is termed the voidness of non-things. (6.220) A non-thing refers to uncompounded phenomena, such as space, nirvana and so forth. That non-things are empty of non-things, is the emptiness of non-things.
That nature is not something real Is emptiness of ‘self-nature’. That such a nature is unmade Is what by nature is conveyed. (6.221) Nature means the actual nature, since is not something contrived by the hearers and so forth. That nature is empty of nature is termed the emptiness of self-nature.
No matter whether buddhas come Or don’t arrive, the fact remains That everything is emptiness, Acclaimed to be the thing beyond; (6.222)
The final end, reality – Is voidness of nature beyond. The thing beyond refers to the supreme reality of things. It is supreme due to being that which always is. On the one hand, the thing beyond is something realised through perfect wisdom, and is empty of itself. Another explanation is that it is called that which is beyond because it exists on the other side. It is the thing beyond since it is the transcendence of samsara, the final end. Since it is unchangeable, this reality of things is empty of the features of emptiness – it is the emptiness of a nature beyond. All these have been proclaimed in the Perfection of Intelligence. (6.223)
To conclude the chapter on intelligence by expressing the excellent and extraordinary qualities of the bodhisattvas with a readiness for the perfection of intelligence, it was said: Thus brightened by the rays of clear intelligence They see the triple world as unborn from the start As clear as a myrobalan plum in their palm – Cessation is achieved through truth that’s relative. (6.224) The word thus refers to the analyses that have been presented. The light of the intelligence developed through the aforementioned analyses sheds a light that overcomes the darkness which blocks the seeing of the reality of things, and the bodhisattvas are here described as now having that. Through the power of the relative truth, they now rest in the state of cessation.
To express how one does not abandon beings as the wish to protect them is at the core of cessation, it was said: Although remaining in cessation all the time, Compassion for defenceless ones will still occur. Since their activities are within the realm of samsara, while their excellent mind is within the realm of nirvana, their compassion for defenceless beings grows exponentially. From this point onwards their intelligence defeats Half-buddhas and those born from the Sugata’s speech. (6.225) They are mentioned together with the intermediate buddhas, thus it says along with the half-buddhas.274 And who are they? Those who are born from the Sugata’s speech, which means the hearers (śrāvaka). These are all defeated by the intelligence of the bodhisattvas who have reached the grounds beyond the sixth, the seventh and so forth.
They soar ahead of beings, like the king of swans, On white and outstretched wings of truth, the relative And ultimate, and speed ahead on virtue’s wind Across the ocean of the Victor’s qualities. (6.226) Their relative qualities will also increase immensely. The two truths are their outstretched wings by which they traverse the great ocean of the Victor’s qualities in the company of the swans among beings who are developing what is excellent. The explanation of the sixth resolve has thus been completed.
This was the sixth resolve from the Commentary to Entering the Middle Way.
The Seventh Ground: Far Progressed
Now, in terms of the seventh resolve it was said: On Far Progressed the bodhisattvas can engage Cessation in each moment, and they now attain A brilliant perfection in their skilful means. (7.1) To engage cessation refers to entering into the state of the final goal, meaning cessation into ultimate reality where all mental elaboration ceases. The bodhisattvas on the seventh ground, Far Progressed, now enter into the cessation they achieved on the sixth ground in each moment. As stated: O heirs of the Victor, from the sixth bodhisattva ground onwards they settle within the state of cessation of bodhisattvas. In each moment of mind the bodhisattvas established on this seventh bodhisattva ground enter into and emerge from the state of cessation, but this cannot be described as the definitive experience of cessation.1 Their perfection of skilful means is also utterly purified. It should be taken into consideration that skilful means, aspiration, power and wisdom are in fact particular aspects of intelligence (prajñā) itself, and that in the context of the perfection of intelligence it is solely the intelligence of analytical investigation that is dealt with, and not the others.
This was the seventh resolve from the Commentary to Entering the Middle Way.
The Eight Ground: Immovable
In terms of the eight resolve it was said: To reach yet even greater virtue than before These mighty beings enter the Immovable Where they acquire irreversibility. The bodhisattvas now enter Immovable, the eight bodhisattva ground where they become irreversible in order to achieve even greater virtue than previously. Concerning the attainment of even greater virtue than before, it is stated: O sons of the Victor, it is just like an ocean-going ship. It needs to be dragged with much toil before it reaches the water, but as soon as it’s afloat it is propelled by the strength of the wind and no more effort is needed. The distance it can run across the ocean in a single day is infinitely longer than could be achieved in even a hundred years of dragging it across land. Likewise, O sons of the Victor, when bodhisattvas have gathered a great many roots of virtue in their practice of the Greater Vehicle, and then reach the ocean of bodhisattva activity, a single moment of spontaneous wisdom will take them infinitely closer to the wisdom of omniscience than all their previous effort could accomplish in a hundred thousand aeons.1 Their aspirations being fully pure, they are Now roused from their cessation by victorious ones. (8.1) The ten innumerable hundred thousand aspirations they made in the context of the first resolve, such as those expressed in the Ten Great Aspirations, now become completely purified, greatly increasing the present perfection of aspiration. But while the bodhisattvas on Immovable are defined as being on the ground of the heirs, they become regents on the ninth, and are crowned as wheel-turning monarchs on the tenth. So as the bodhisattvas on the Immovable ground have entered into cessation, the illustrious buddhas will then rouse them from this cessation.
As stated: O heirs of the Victor. As the bodhisattvas on the Immovable bodhisattva ground are empowered by their past aspirations and have settled within the entrance to Dharma, the illustrious buddhas influence them with their tathāgata wisdom, and speak the following: ‘Excellent, O son of good family, excellent! You have now reached acceptance of the ultimate in accordance with the Buddha’s teachings. However, O son of good family, you still do not possess the ten powers, four confidences and so forth as I do, and must apply yourself in order to gain these perfect qualities of buddhahood. You must be diligent! But do not abandon this door of acceptance! O son of good family, although you are now resting within the liberation of peace, you must consider the ordinary immature beings who are not at peace, who being ravaged by many afflictions and beleaguered by swarms of conceptual thoughts, are not at all at peace. O son of good family, remember the aspirations you made in the past! …’ … If the illustrious buddhas did not2 thus influence the bodhisattvas with their omniscient wisdom, they would pass into complete nirvana … [and so forth].3
Because they have now been roused from cessation, No blemish will maintain its hold upon the non-desirous mind, And so, upon the eight ground stains are severed, utter peace attained. Afflictions at an end, they now surpass the triple realm, and still The space-like boundless wealth of all the buddhas lies beyond their reach. (8.2) As the sun of non-conceptual wisdom rises, the gloom of the afflictions that has caused birth in the three realms is completely eradicated, and true peace ensues. But, even though they have abandoned this and are now supreme among the three levels of the world, at this stage the bodhisattvas are still not yet able to achieve the boon of the illustrious buddhas. To gain that they must exert themselves further. As it says, ‘they would pass into complete nirvana …,’4 since they can now be free from the attachment of the three realms. Without being free from attachment, nirvana is not possible.
It might be asked, ‘If they are now freed from the attachment of the three realms, how are they then able to perfect all the qualities of buddhahood when samsara has ceased?’ To explain: Although samsara has been stopped, they have attained the powers ten, And through these, manifest in various ways to beings of the world. (8.3) Although samsara has ceased at this point, the ten powers are now born in them, and by means of these they can manifest their mental body in a variety of different forms. It is therefore not contradictory that they can continue to completely fulfil their accumulations. As for the ten powers, they are as stated: (1) They have mastery of life in terms of blessing their lifespan to last for inexpressible upon inexpressible aeons. (2) They have mastery of mind in terms of immersing themselves in the wisdom of immeasurable meditative concentrations. (3) They have mastery of material implements in terms of displaying the blessing of adorning all the realms of the world with many adornments. (4) They have mastery of karma in terms of revealing the impact of an action’s result at its particular time. (5) They have mastery of birth in terms of the ability to display birth within any world. (6) They have mastery of prayer as they can display true and complete buddhahood in any buddha field at any time desired. (7) They have mastery of aspirations as they can display within any world system vast arrays of buddhas. (8) They have mastery of miraculous abilities as they can display magical emanations in all buddha fields. (9) They have mastery of wisdom as they can display a Tathāgata’s powers, confidences, unique buddha qualities, perfect marks and signs, as well as true and complete awakening. (10) They have mastery of Dharma as they can teach the dharma in any form that is without centre or limit.5 The explanation of the eight resolve has thus been completed.
This was the eight resolve from the Commentary to Entering the Middle Way.
The Ninth Ground: Perfect Intellect
In terms of the ninth resolve it was said: Upon the ninth their power is complete and pure in every way, And likewise fully pure their qualities of perfect intellect. (9.1) On the ninth bodhisattva ground the bodhisattvas’ perfection of power is fully purified, and they achieve the four pure qualities of perfect intellect: a detailed knowledge of things, meaning, interpretation and eloquence. (1) The detailed knowledge of things is to understand the defining characteristics of all phenomena. (2) The detailed knowledge of meaning is to understand the classifications of all phenomena. (3) The detailed knowledge of interpretation is to understand how to express things clearly. (4) The detailed knowledge of eloquence is to have an uninterrupted understanding of the relevant causes of phenomena. The explanation of the ninth resolve has thus been completed.
This was the ninth resolve from the Commentary to Entering the Middle Way.
The Tenth Ground: Cloud of Dharma
In terms of the tenth resolve it was said: Upon them on the tenth ground every buddha now bestows supreme Empowerment, and through their wisdom they now reach supremacy. Then from these victor’s heirs spontaneous rains of Dharma shower down, Like torrents from the clouds, so beings’ crops of virtue may increase. (10.1) The bodhisattvas on the tenth bodhisattva ground are empowered by the illustrious buddhas, as stated: When ten incalculable meditative concentrations come to an end, a concentration called Empowered to be indistinguishable from the wisdom of omniscience develops for the bodhisattva. As soon as this happens, a giant jewel lotus the size of a million trichiliocosms inlaid with all kinds of precious jewels …, and surrounded by as many lotuses as there are minute particles in ten incalculable trichiliocosms. The bodhisattva then comes to rest, seated there in a body that corresponds. As soon as he attains this concentration and appears seated there …. From the circle of hair between the brows of all the illustrious buddhas who have gathered from all the buddha fields, light now streams forth to empower the bodhisattva.1 Their perfection of wisdom is fully purified, and a spontaneous rain of the true Dharma pours down as if from massive rain-clouds in order to make the harvests of the world’s virtue bountiful. The explanation of the tenth resolve has thus been completed.
This was the tenth resolve from the Commentary to Entering the Middle Way.
The Ground of Buddhahood
To determine the qualities they gain from the first resolve and onwards it was said: This is the time when they a hundred buddhas see, And likewise come to know that by them they are blessed. For hundred aeons on this stage they can remain, And know precisely what has passed and what will be. (11.1)
These wise ones enter and depart a hundred concentrations, and Are able to make tremble and illuminate a hundred worlds; Displaying miracles they can mature a hundred sentient beings, And have the means to travel to a hundred realms of purity. (11.2)
The scions of the Mighty One unlock a hundred Dharma doors, And in their bodies they reveal a hundred manifested forms. The beauty and the riches of their retinue promotes their own, Reflected in each of the hundred victor’s heirs they make appear. (11.3) As stated: Having gone forth, they attain and enter repeatedly a hundred concentrations each second, each moment, each instant. They see a hundred buddhas and perfectly understand their blessings. They cause a hundred world systems to shake, travel to a hundred pure realms, illuminate a hundred worlds, mature a hundred beings, remain for a hundred aeons, have access to a hundred aeons into the past and future, unlock a hundred doors of Dharma, display a hundred bodies, each body again displaying a retinue of a hundred bodhisattvas.1
Such are the qualities the wise ones gain upon The Joyous ground, and on Immaculate the same Is gained but then increased a thousandfold. … And these same hundredfold qualities that the bodhisattvas gain when developing the first resolve, are then expanded as they gain them a thousandfold when developing the second resolve. And upon the development of the third resolve these same qualities are then: … And on The five succeeding ones their qualities increase: (11.4)
They gain these qualities a hundred thousandfold, A billionfold, ten billionfold, a trillionfold, And then ten million trillionfold – thus multiplied In stages by the thousands, all of this they gain. (11.5) As explained, the bodhisattvas developing the third resolve gain a hundred thousand of these qualities. On developing the fourth they gain a billion. On developing the fifth they gain ten billion. On developing the sixth they gain a trillion. And on developing the seventh resolve the bodhisattvas gain ten quintillion of these same qualities.
Beyond this the qualities become impossible to calculate, equal to the number of the most minute particles: When dwelling on the ground Immovable they are Beyond conceptual thought, and qualities they gain As many as the particles one finds within A hundred thousand trichiliocosmic worlds. (11.6) The bodhisattvas who develop the eight resolve gain as many of these mentioned qualities are there are particles within a hundred thousand trichilocosm worlds.
And when they find themselves on Perfect Intellect, Such bodhisattvas gain the mentioned qualities Ten times as many as the particles one may Encounter in a hundred thousand countless worlds. (11.7) The bodhisattvas who develop the ninth resolve gain as many of these former qualities as there are particles within a million countless2 trichiliocosms.
So many are their qualities upon the tenth They cannot be expressed by any verbal means. When added up they are in number equal to All atoms that exist, indeed unutterable. (11.8) The bodhisattvas who develop the tenth resolve gain as many of the mentioned qualities as there are minute particles in the inexpressibly many untold buddha realms. In the phrase so many are the qualities upon the tenth, the words so many (tāvat?) are saying that to indicate the qualities attained on this level by for instance saying that they amount to such and such a number, is not possible.
Furthermore, regarding these bodhisattvas: They have the power to continuously display Within each pore of their own bodies numberless Awakened buddhas with their bodhisattva hosts, As well as humans, demigods and gods alike. (11.9) The bodhisattvas who have developed the tenth resolve are able to display within each pore of their body, and without any conceptual effort, innumerable illustrious buddhas and their pure realms presiding over immeasurable retinues of bodhisattvas, and can alter these appearances every moment. Furthermore, in each instant they have the power to display within each of their pores, the five types of beings of samsara, humans and so forth, without any confusion between them. The words as well as (api) include also other beings not mentioned, as when it states, ‘… Indra, Brahma, the world-guardians (lokapāla), kings of men, hearers, solitary buddhas – the Tathāgata assumes the forms of Indra and so forth to teach the Dharma to beings receptive to the training.’3 Detailed descriptions of the qualities may be found in the same sutra.4 This completes the presentation of the qualities related to the bodhisattva grounds.
Something must now be mentioned in relation to the qualities of the ground of buddhahood, and this is done in hymnic form and directed at the illustrious Buddha. As stated: Because the moon is at its brightest shining from a cloudless sky, Ahead you ventured on this ground wherein ten powers are produced, And found in Akanishta what you sought, the stage of utmost peace, Accomplishing the peerless goal endowed with every quality. (11.10) Just as only from a clear sky will the moon illuminate all that lives, the Illustrious One removed the darkness obstructing the attainment of buddha qualities, saw that now having accomplishing the tenth resolve he had the potential to attain the qualities of a buddha, and thus applied himself towards this next stage, buddhahood. And what the Tathāgata strove to gain, the unsurpassable wisdom, he found in Akanishta. This is where all qualities are brought to completion, as it is where every quality becomes complete and perfect. Peerless, there is nothing like it and nothing beyond it.
To indicate how, when realising complete awakening, the Illustrious One in a single instant attained the wisdom of omniscience, it was said: Just as there is no difference in the space within the different jars, No difference is there in existent things in true reality. Thus, when you came to realise that things are of a single taste, O wise one, in a single instant you knew all which can be known. (11.11) For example, although jars, bowls and so forth are different, in its non-obstructive quality the space enclosed by them isn’t different. Similarly, although existent things – forms, feelings and so forth – are different, the actual reality pertaining to them, their characteristic unborn nature, is not different, and actual reality should thus be known to be only of a single taste. And the single moment that the Illustrious One understands this, in that moment he gains the wisdom of omniscience.
It might be objected: ‘If true reality is peace, the mind cannot engage with it. If mind cannot engage it, then the knowing subject makes no sense. Without a knowing it’s absurd for something to be known at all. And who is that non-knower teaching others, “This is how it is”?’ (11.12) ‘It is established that, “Non-production is the actual reality of forms and so forth,” and that, “This is what is known.” But when it is established that true reality of things is pacification, one must then necessarily accept that this is not actually something with which the conceptual mind can engage. If the mind could engage with the actual nature of unborn reality, how would it appear to be? Hence, not having any aspects, the actual reality cannot be mentally engaged with. And when it cannot be mentally engaged with, a knowing subject certainly makes no sense. How so? As it says: Without a knowing it’s absurd for something to be known at all. If no knowing at all is taking place, how can something be known? If mind is unarisen there can be no knower of things, and who are you then imagining is telling others, “The actual reality of things that I have understood has these characteristics”? This does not make sense.’
To reply to this: Reality is unborn, and the mind as well is free from birth. Thus, when relating to this it’s as if it knows reality. For just as it is when the mind takes on the aspects of something That it can know the object, this makes sense from the conventional stance. (11.13) This is saying that, when it takes on its concordant aspects, consciousness knows the object. For example, one can say that, when in the consciousness there is a grasping of blueness, then blue is known. Similarly, when the consciousness adopts an aspect that conforms with actual reality, one can designate that it knows actual reality. And to indicate that consciousness takes on its aspect we find here, reality is unborn, and the mind as well is free from birth; thus, when relating to this it’s as if it knows reality, establishing thus that it relates to its aspects. And when saying, for just as it is when the mind takes on the aspects…, this is then confirmed by referring to an example that is commonly accepted. Hence it is established that actual reality is known through designation, and not because there is actually something known by someone, as both the knower and the known are in fact non-arisen.
And to reply to the statement, and who for you is that non-knower teaching others, ‘This is how it is’?, although it is true that the mind is unborn in actual reality, it is not impossible to teach reality within the world. How so? To explain: Through their enjoyment bodies, brought by merit’s force, And through their powers – emanations, space and more – The Dharma’s sounds of true reality emerge, And so reality is known within the world. (11.14) Dwelling in a physical form, the tathāgatas take on inconceivable and multifareous bodies that make the dharmadhātu evident, brought on through vast merit. These make possible, in different forms, the bodhisattvas’ enjoyment of the Dharma. And through such verbal utterances that come about through the blessings of the tathāgatas, born through vast merit – which can help one also in the present reach an understanding of the various conventions of the scriptures, such as in the statement, ‘O Mañjuśrī, the expression unborn and unceasing is an epithet for the Tathāgata’5 – those in the world who are prospective vessels for such teachings can come to an unmistaken certainty about the actual reality of things. And let alone through bodies that are formed through merit, when emanations appear through their blessings they can make clarifying utterances about the reality of things, and the world finds certainty about actual reality. Their power can operate in other ways apart from that displayed by emanations – ways not encompassed by mind and mental states – such as space, grass, trees, walls, stones and so forth, whose sounds can make the world see reality.
When there is no such conceptual activity happening at the present, seeing as there is no mind or mental factors involved, how can the aforementioned activity occur? To demonstrate this, an external example is used: As when a master potter plies his wheel And labours long to get it spinning well, The wheel will then keep turning without toil And pots and other things can be produced. (11.15)
It is the same for dharmakāya lords Who make no effort at the present time, Yet truly marvellous things do happen in Response to beings’ merit and great aims. (11.16) Although there are no concepts involved, they work for the benefit of the limitless realms of beings in ways that suit those to be trained. In the past they made prayers such as, ‘Just as the illustrious buddhas, without conceptual ideas, assiduously work in the most beneficial way for the betterment of beings – like wish-fulfilling jewels or trees of plenty – and whilst not departing from the dharmadhātu even for an instant, never miss an opportunity to train beings, I shall do the same.’ And through the power of these, excellent manifestations appear to carry out the activity of maturing those to be trained, by creating such opportunities to learn the Dharma. Thus one should understand, that although they do not at present make any conscious effort in this regard, the actual reality of things is being taught and the benefit of beings accomplished.
Now, in terms of the dharmakāya, it was said: When all the brittle twigs of what is known Are burned, peace comes – the Victor’s dharma form. And then there is no birth and no decay, The mind will cease, the kāya manifest. (11.17) The wisdom-nature kāya completely burns up the brittle firewood of knowable things, and since knowable things are unborn, that property of being unborn is the dharmakāya of the buddhas. In terms of this reality of things (dharmatā), it is stated: The buddhas see the reality of things, And the guides are the body of dharma. There is no so-called reality of things, It is not something that can be known.6 In the body of dharma (dharmakāya) there is no birth and no decay, and in terms of this reality it is said, ‘O Mañjuśrī, the expression unborn and unceasing is an epithet for the Tathāgata.’7 And since mind and mental factors cannot in any way whatsoever take this actual reality, that is within the sphere of wisdom, as an object, that it manifests in bodily form (kāya) is something conventionally posited.
And this: The peaceful kāya, lucid like the bounteous tree, Without conceptual thought just like the wishing-jewel, Grands lasting riches on the world till all are free, Appearing just to those free from complexity. (11.18) This body, said to be the manifestation of actual reality, is held to have the nature of peace since it is free from mind and mental factors. But although its nature is peace, it is lucid in its activities for the benefit of beings, just like the clarity of the bounteous tree. And like the wishing-jewel has no conceptual thought, meaning that, although it is free from conceptual ideas, it makes that which is desired come to be, just like the bounteous tree and the wish-fulfilling jewel do. And this body remains to bestow riches on the world for as long as samsara exists. The word lasting indicates that it remains for an extensive period of time. This is thus conveying that the buddhas remain in this form to carry out the benefit of beings for as long as the world exists, for as long as space remains. This body ornamented with symbols of hundreds of merits only appears to exist for bodhisattvas who are free from the complexities of thought, who have attained the stainless mirror-like intelligence, the result of their accumulations of merit and wisdom, and it does not appear to those encumbered by the complexities of conceptual thought.
To describe the incredible ability they have, in terms of making concordant bodies other than those described above, appear to train beings – whether produced from the dharmakāya or through the power of the form kāya – it was said: The mighty sages can within a single form And in a single instant demonstrate all past Existences relating to them, though they’re gone, Complete, in detail, and with flawless clarity. (11.19) They are able to spontaneously demonstrate the past existences they had throughout beginningless samsara before they reached the wisdom of omniscience and can show these clearly and unmistakenly in their totality without confusing the order in which they occurred, and can do so completely in an instant and in a single concordant body, like an image appearing completely clearly in a mirror.
To express what occurs when they spontaneously display in a single body all the bodhisattva activities undertaken, and where, how and why these came about, it was said: They demonstrate completely in a single form How buddha realms and mighty sages did appear; And how their forms, acts, strengths and powers were; The size and manner of the groups of hearers there, (11.20)
And how the bodhisattvas gathered did appear; How was their Dharma, and what standing they did have, The way they studied, and the training they endured, And what amounts were given them in offering. (11.21) The illustrious ones can demonstrate fully and in a single form how they practiced the perfection of generosity in the past, and to which illustrious buddhas they showed reverence; how the buddha realms were, whether made of sapphire, ruby, emerald, crystal or the like, and how they were beautified by trees of precious materials here, there and everywhere; the beauty of the various different beings living there; and how the illustrious buddhas took birth there and so forth. The illustrious buddhas can demonstrate fully and in a single form how their eminent abilities of forms and activities were; how large and in what form the sanghas of hearers gathered were; in which ways these sanghas of hearers applied themselves to teachings that are in tune with the Dharma; the excellent marks and signs that adorned the bodhisattvas within these buddha realms of the illustrious buddhas; the beauty of the robes, food, accommodation and so forth that were enjoyed there; and how the distinction of Dharma were, the practice of a single vehicle or three vehicles. They can demonstrate fully and in a single form to which standing they adhered, whether of the brahmin caste or others, how their appearance and intellect were, whether they were householders or had gone forth; how they studied the Dharma and then trained by taking up the precepts with or without remainder; the amounts of offerings that were given to them, whether as different types of foods and so forth, as dharma robes or precious articles, offered to the sangha of illustrious buddhas, hearers and bodhisattvas, and for how long and in which amounts these things were offered.
And just as they can demonstrate the extent of their practice of the perfection of generosity: And likewise all their prior discipline, Their patience, effort, concentration and Intelligence …, To this may be added, ‘all of it they display in a single form.’ And not only can they demonstrate all this simultaneously in a single form, but: … all of these practices They clearly show within a single pore. (11.22)
And not only can they display their own activities, but also: The buddhas of the past and those to come, Those present now as far as space pervades, How in the world they teach the Dharma’s tunes Relieving beings seized by suffering; (11.23)
And all their works from making the resolve Till wakening; these things they clearly know And demonstrate within a single pore, And instantly, as if they were their own. (11.24) When ordinary individuals, learned in the arts of magic, are able to use the power of spells to make various things appear to happen with their own bodies, would not the lords of beings, the illustrious buddhas, and the bodhisattvas who understand that things are in nature no different than magical illusions, be able to do this? What wise individual would then doubt whether they haven’t realised this? This is thus a clarifying example that wise individuals will be convinced by.
And just as they are able to demonstrate their own activities and those of other tathāgatas in a single instant and within a single pore: So too with every deed done throughout time By bodhisattvas, solitary ones, The noble hearers and all common folk, They show at once and in a single pore. (11.25)
Having covered the splendour of their forms, what is now illustrated is their excellent and non-conceptual will power: Through will power these pure ones can display the worlds As far as space extends within a speck of dust, The speck engulfing the entire universe Without growth of the speck nor shrinking of the worlds. (11.26) The illustrious buddhas can through their will power display the universe as far as space extends inside a single minute particle, without the worlds becoming any smaller or the particles any bigger; and then merely through their will power can show things the way they are again. The speck engulfing the entire universe: the illustrious buddhas show the entire universe, the universe including each and every world, contained by a single minute particle.
Likewise, With no conceptual thought you can display In every instant till the end of time Diverse activities as countless as All specks of dust on every continent. (11.27) This is a verse of praise to the tathāgatas expressing their extraordinary qualities, saying that, ‘You entertain no concepts, yet the diverse activities you display in each moment as long as samsara exists is beyond reckoning – all the minute particles on every world continent wouldn’t even suffice to enumerate them.’
As the ground of buddhahood is recognised by its ten powers, a brief account of these were given by saying: The might of knowing what is fact and what is not, And likewise what will be the consequence of acts, To understand the different preferences of beings And what their various abilities might be; (11.28)
To know whose faculties are good and whose are not, Where every path with lead; the might of knowing all Samādhis (concentrations), liberated states, Absorptions, states of equilibrium and such; (11.29)
To have the power to recount all previous lives, To know the processes of death and then rebirth, To know that all defilements have been fully spent; This is a summary of all the powers ten. (11.30)
In terms of the power of knowing fact from fiction, it was said: The wise ones have expressed what is in fact the case When certain causes bring particular results; And endless incorrect and contrary ideas That mars their wisdom have been shed – this is their strength. (11.31) Concerning the implications of the statement when certain causes bring particular results, it can be said that certain causes lead to certain results, as is the case when non-virtue brings the unwanted, and certain things lead to certain attainments, as when the noble path leads to nirvana, to give but a few examples of what is considered reasonable. There is a factual basis for certain causes bringing about particular results, and when it says factual basis, these words are referring to the cause. To be contrary to what has been explained,8 implies that it is non-factual. When something does not give rise to something, no factual basis for that exists, such as is the case with virtue which does not result in the unpleasant, and that the eight states will not manifest when one has reached the path of seeing. This is therefore considered a power of the illustrious buddhas, in that the wise ones cannot be challenged on this.
As the noble Questions of Dharaṇīśvara Sutra states: O son of noble family, through his supreme tathāgata-wisdom the Tathāgata has precise knowledge of what is fact, and has precise knowledge of what is fiction. Son of noble family, what is fact, and what is fiction? O son of noble family, it is fiction, it is not the case, that doing something physically, verbally, or mentally negative will yield something desirable, beautiful, joyous, or pleasant. This is fiction. It is a fact, it is the case, that doing something physically, verbally, or mentally positive will yield that which is desirable, beautiful, joyous or pleasant. This is a fact. It is fiction, it is not the case, that stinginess will result in great wealth, that bad behaviour will lead to birth as a god or human, that malice will lead to beautiful features, the laziness will lead to realisation, that a distracted mind will be able to undo faults, that misunderstanding can overcome all that makes habitual patterns continue, that committing the acts of immediate retribution will bring about a settled mind, that remaining conceptual can lead to the attainment of harmonious acceptance,9 or that a mind steeped in regret can be pliable. This is fiction. It is fiction, it is not the case, that with a female body one can become a wheel-turning monarch, Indra, Brahma… (and so forth). It is a fact, it is the case, that generosity will result in great wealth… (and so forth, as above). This is the first tathāgata activity of the Tathāgata.10
In terms of the power of knowing karma and its effects it was said: There’s nothing blocking their ability to see When acts are right or wrong, or neither of these two, Which grant exhaustion, and their various effects; They know all this throughout all time – this is their strength. (11.32) That they have complete understanding of the three types of karma – agreeable acts, disagreeable acts, acts that are both agreeable and disagreeable, as well as the undefiled that leads to exhaustion – and the variety of effects these have; that this is pervasive throughout all the worlds of the three times, each in particular, all their divisions, and so forth; and that there is nothing that can obstruct this knowledge that pervades all knowable things for them; this is considered the Illustrious One’s power of knowing karma and its effects.
As stated: Furthermore, the Tathāgata has precise knowledge of all karma occurring in the past, future and at present, and the occasion, reason, nature and effect of their having been committed. How does he know them? O son of noble family, the Tathāgata sees how past karma created through virtue, and unrelated to non-virtue, will yield something wholesome in the future. The Tathāgata sees how karma created through non-virtue, and divorced from virtue, will yield something unwholesome in the future. He likewise knows what kind of karma will bring baseness in the future, and what will bring excellence. And he knows that which can be base at present but will lead to excellence in the future, and what is excellent at present but will bring baseness in the future. He likewise knows the details of each such combination accordingly. The Tathāgata likewise knows the kinds of acts that had a limited application when committed in the past, but will grow and have a vast application in the future; what might have been a small undertaking that will have a significant outcome, and what was a significant undertaking that will have an insignificant outcome; which actions will yield the result of a hearer, which will yield the result of a solitary buddha, and which will yield the result of the awakening of a buddha. The Tathāgata knows which types of acts are painful in the present but will yield a pleasant result in the future, and which are pleasant at present but will yield an unpleasant result in the future. In this way, the Tathāgata knows precisely the acts of sentient beings of the past, present and future, their causes and their results, and knows them directly and without intermediary. Informed by this knowledge he teaches the Dharma accordingly. This is the second tathāgata-activity of the Tathāgata.11
In terms of the power of knowing the variety of dispositions it was said: To know the dispositions prompted by the strength Of passion or the like, in all their different hues, The base, the middling, excellent, and those concealed, For every being throughout time – this is their strength. (11.33) The function of the word passion (rāga) is to be illustrative of the afflictions, and implies the others as well, aversion and so forth. Or the like is there to include all other virtuous states of mind as well, such as faith. The word prompted is saying that these are seeds of passion and so forth, which is why it is saying prompted by… passion or the like. Dispositions that are brought about through the seeds of passion and so forth, or faith and so forth, are referred to as propensity (adhimukti), determination (adhyāśaya), wish (kāma), or disposition (chanda). There are other types of dispositions as well where the applications are unclear. And the arising of the comprehensive understanding that distinguishes between all these different types, is considered the illustrious Buddha’s power of knowing various dispositions.
As stated: Furthermore, O son of noble family, the Tathāgata has precise knowledge of the many and various dispositions of other sentient beings and individuals. And how, O son of noble family, does the Tathāgata have precise knowledge of the many and various dispositions of other sentient beings and individuals? The Tathāgata knows which individuals are desirous but are inclined towards aversion, which are averse but are inclined towards desire, and which are confused but are inclined towards desire, anger and confusion. The Tathāgata knows which individuals are doing virtue but are inclined towards non-virtue. The Tathāgata knows which individuals apply themselves to minor tasks but have an inclination for significant tasks, and which ones apply themselves to significant tasks but have an inclination for minor tasks. The Tathāgata knows the dispositions where little application can have extraordinary outcomes, extraordinary application can have lesser outcomes, where one is bound for the positive but can be influenced to use one’s abilities for the negative, is bound for the negative but can be influenced to use one’s abilities for the positive, where the outcome is uncertain but one can be influenced to go in a certain direction; which dispositions might lead to the transcendence of the desire realm, and which can lead to the transcendence of the form realm, the formless realm, and the transcendence of all the three realms. Informed by this knowledge he teaches the Dharma accordingly. This is the third tathāgata-activity of the Tathāgata.12
In terms of the power of knowing the various elements it was said: Proficient in the elements, the buddhas teach The nature of the eye and such as element; The boundless insight of the perfect buddhas see All features of the elements – this is their strength. (11.34) Nature, essence and emptiness are synonymous. The buddhas are skilled in the divisions of all elements (dhātu),13 and their knowledge is unobstructed in relation to the many distinctions used for the nature of the elements, such as characterising them as internally empty and so forth, and this is then considered the power of knowing the various elements.
As stated: Furthermore, O son of noble family, the Tathāgata understands the elements of eye, form and eye-consciousness. He understands the inner emptiness, outer emptiness, and outer-inner emptiness. (This is applied to all the other group of three among the eighteen elements.) He knows the element of earth… (and so forth). How does he know these? He knows the element of space exactly as it is. Likewise, he has considered and precisely understood the desire, form and formless elements. The Tathāgata knows precisely how the element of the compounded has the characteristic of something constructed; the element of the non-compounded has the characteristic of something unconstructed; the element of the thoroughly afflicted has the characteristic of temporary affliction; the element of the fully purified has the characteristic of natural luminosity; the element of samsara has the characteristic of the fault of unknowing; the element14 of nirvana has the characteristic of genuine awareness; and likewise knows the manner of the elements involved with the world, the elements that raise one, the elements that lead, the elements that hinder, the elements of intention, and the elements of support. Informed by this knowledge he teaches the Dharma accordingly. This is the fourth tathāgata-activity of the Tathāgata.15
In terms of the power of knowing which faculties are superior and which are not it was said: The total and unhindered understanding of Discursive thought and such – the sharpest, deemed supreme, The dull and middling, lesser ones – and how the eyes And such combine to help us know – this is their strength. (11.35) Discursive thought (saṃkalpa) means mistaken superimposition. Discursive thought is a faculty, since it is by virtue of it that desire and so forth are produced. The intent of the words and such is to include virtuous factors such as faith and so forth. When these are supreme (vara), this implies excellence, while when they are mean or middling, the term lesser (avara) is used. In saying the eyes and such, the list of twenty-two faculties, beginning with the eyes, is being referred to.16 To have a penetrating understanding of the nature of these faculties, and of how they interact to produce results – a knowledge that is unimpeded – is considered the power of knowing supreme and inferior faculties.
As stated: Furthermore, O son of noble family, the Tathāgata knows precisely the state of the faculties of other sentient beings and individuals. How, O son of noble family, does the Tathāgata know the state of the faculties of other sentient beings and individuals? O son of noble family, the Tathāgata knows precisely those beings of dull faculties to be sentient beings with dull faculties. Similarly, he knows those of middling faculties, and knows those of sharp faculties. The Tathāgata knows which type of faculty of discursive thought will produce fully-fledged desire, produce fully-fledged anger, and produce fully-fledged confusion. (The phrase fully-fledged here implies that it is fully developed.) The Tathāgata knows which faculty of discursive thought will produce artificial desire, anger and confusion. The Tathāgata knows which faculty of discursive thought will produce irregular desire, anger and confusion, and by which faculty of discursive thought the production of desire, anger and confusion will be ended. The Tathāgata knows everything related to the faculties that have arisen due to virtue, and which have arisen out of a sense of renunciation. Furthermore, the Tathāgata knows all the faculties from the eyes up to the faculty of having understood all. The Tathāgata knows which faculty originates with the eye faculty and connects with the ear faculty. And likewise from the ear faculty up until the mind faculty. The Tathāgata knows which beings have a propensity for generosity, but apply themselves to discipline, and thus by taking the level of the faculties into consideration, gives instructions on generosity. Likewise for those with a propensity for discipline, patience, diligence, meditative absorption and intelligence, but who are applying themselves to generosity and so forth, he gives instructions on discipline and so forth accordingly. Again, to those with a propensity for the vehicle of the hearers but who are applying themselves to the vehicle of the solitary buddhas…, (and so forth). O son of good family, the Tathāgata thus knows precisely that the fully developed faculties of all sentient beings are fully developed faculties. He knows precisely that the faculties not fully developed are not fully developed. He knows precisely that not being ready to relinquish they are not ready to relinquish. He knows precisely that being ready to relinquish they are ready to relinquish. The Tathāgata knows precisely everything concerning the faculties of sentient beings, how they are applied, what the motivations are, how they come about, which conditions are influential, what is the focus, what are the goals, and what will be the end. This is the fifth tathāgata-activity of the Tathāgata.17
In terms of the power of knowing every path it is said: To know where all paths lead without impediment – The ones that lead to buddhahood, or wakening Of solitary ones or hearers, or to states Of spirits, beasts, gods, men, or hell – this is their strength. (11.36) The word path in this context means a route. The words every path implies that paths may take one anywhere. Some paths are considered to lead to buddhahood. Some to the awakening of the solitary buddhas. Some to the awakening of the hearers. Some to the states of gods (and so forth and so on), and some to hell. The words and so forth18 refer to the various forms these states can take. The Tathāgata knows precisely where each path leads. Hence, that the knowledge of the Illustrious One has unhindered access to all paths, is considered the power of knowing every path.
As stated: Furthermore, O son of noble family, the Tathāgata has precise knowledge of the destination of every path. How does he know them? He knows the type of sentient beings destined for the wholesome. He knows the type of sentient beings for whom it is uncertain, and those destined for the unwholesome. He knows the capacity of destined sentient beings. There are beings who have a powerful impetus from previously having applied themselves to excellent things, beings who have sharp faculties and can come to understand things without great exertion, and it might then be proper for the Tathāgata to teach them Dharma, or it might not. For those who have a potential for liberation, the Tathāgata understands what former causes and influences are present, thus teaching them the Dharma accordingly. He knows the capacity of sentient beings of the uncertain kind. Beings for whom there is potential for development, who might under certain conditions be influenced, and be liberated if they encounter the appropriate counsel and guidance, but who will not be liberated if these conditions are not encountered. If the Tathāgata, taking into account the relevant causes and conditions, were to give them teachings, and they were to take up these teachings and put them into practice, they would gain the result. For this purpose, the illustrious buddhas will then appear to them. He knows the capacity of sentient beings destined for the unwholesome. There are those who haven’t undergone any training, who are slow and dull, and not suitable vessels; to these the Tathāgata might teach the Dharma, or not. If there is no prospect of them gaining liberation, the Tathāgata recognising them as unfit vessels, remains neutral towards them. For these the bodhisattvas don their armour. Furthermore, the Tathāgata knows the threefold path of attachment. In what way is it threefold? The path of attachment arising from beauty, the path of attachment arising from passionate concern, and the path of attachment arising due to past habits. He knows the threefold path of aversion: the path of aversion arising from anger, the path of aversion arising from expectations not being met, and the path of aversion arising due to past habits. He knows the threefold path of confusion: the path of confusion arising from ignorance, the path of confusion arising from the view of identity, and the path of confusion arising from doubt. These the Tathāgata knows… (and so forth). In this way the Tathāgata’s wisdom can see without obstruction the outcome of whichever path sentient beings follow, and how the opposite would turn out. This is the sixth tathāgata-activity of the Tathāgata.19
In terms of the power of knowing meditative absorptions, liberations, concentrations, states of equilibrium, and the thoroughly afflicted and fully purified states, it says: To know for each and every yogin everywhere What is their practice of absorptions, freedoms and Shamatha, and which equilibrium among The nine – that nothing blocks this knowledge is their strength. (11.37) Within the unlimited number of worlds there are innumerably many different types of yogins practicing among other things, the following: the four meditative absorptions (dhyāna) and the eight liberations (vimokṣa); calm-abiding meditation (śamatha), which is a concentration (samādhi) defined as a mind with a one-pointed virtuous focus; the nine progressive states of equilibrium (samāpatti), which are the four absorptions, the four formless states and the cessation of perception and feeling; the causes of the thoroughly afflicted state, which are ignorance, incorrect understanding and so forth; the causes of the fully purified state, which are words agreeable to others and keeping a correct understanding for oneself. Hence, to have an unhindered understanding of the innumerably many different absorptions and so forth of different types of yogins, is considered the power of knowing meditative absorptions, liberations, concentrations, states of equilibrium, and the thoroughly afflicted and fully purified states.
As stated: Furthermore, O son of noble family, the Tathāgata has precise knowledge of absorptions, liberations, concentrations, states of equilibrium, and the emergence of the thoroughly afflicted and fully purified states. How does he know them? The Tathāgata knows what the causes are, and which conditions lead sentient beings to the thoroughly afflicted state. The Tathāgata knows what the causes are, and which conditions lead sentient beings to find the fully purified state. What are these causes, and which are the conditions? The cause for the thorough affliction of sentient beings is mistaken understanding. The condition for the mistaken understanding of sentient beings is ignorance. Ignorance is the cause and mental formations the conditions. Mental formations are the cause and consciousness the condition… (and so forth). Afflictions are the causes and karma the condition. Holding to a view is the cause and craving the condition. Latent propensities are the causes and the emergence of these the condition. What are the causes and which are the conditions for the fully purified state of sentient beings? There are two causes, and two conditions. Which two? Words agreeable to others and keeping a proper understanding for oneself. A further two are one-pointed focus of calm abiding and mastery of insight meditation… (and so forth). These are the causes and the conditions for the purification of sentient beings, and this the Tathāgata knows. Likewise, O son of noble family, in his wisdom the Tathāgata is separated from desire, separated from negative non-virtuous qualities, enters into the first absorption having deliberation and judgement, of joy and bliss emerging from separation, and then leaves this cessation. Having remained in this cessation he emerges from the first absorption. He enters the eight liberations in due order, in reverse order, as well as irregularly. Although he can demonstrate concentrations as states of equilibrium, and demonstrate states of equilibrium as concentrations, the Tathāgata’s concentrations are never confused; for the Tathāgata does not need to focus to enter into meditative concentrations. A single concentration of the Tathāgata makes manifest all concentrations, but the Tathāgata does not leave one concentration in order to enter into every other concentration; there is no going from one state of mind to the next for the Tathāgata. One can never perceive the Tathāgata’s mind to be uncomposed. No one is able to perceive the concentration of the Tathāgata. The concentration of the hearers is outshone by the concentration of the solitary buddhas. The concentration of the solitary buddhas is outshone by the concentration of the bodhisattvas. The concentration of the bodhisattvas is outshone by the concentration of the Tathāgata. But the Tathāgata’s concentration cannot be outshone; one cannot outshine the wisdom of the Tathāgata. The Tathāgata knows which instructions and guidance is needed for the hearers to develop concentration. The Tathāgata knows what is needed for the solitary buddhas and the bodhisattvas to develop concentration. Aware of this he gives instructions and teachings accordingly. This is the seventh tathāgata-activity of the Tathāgata.20
In relation to the power of remembering previous lives it says: To see the lives they lived while they were still confused, As well as all past lives of every sentient being, However numberless; their origins, their lands, And how they were – to know all this, this is their strength. (11.38) The phrase while they were still confused refers to the object of their knowing, recounting previous existences since beginningless time one after the other. All sentient beings includes the entire limitless realm of beings. By saying their origins all the causes involved in this are being included. As the sutra states, ‘… my caste was such and such, my features were such and such…;’ and remembering that one’s caste was such and such is referred to here when remembering how they were. They remember, ‘I dwelt in that place, and then I died and was born in such and such a place. Then I died again and was born here…,’ which is what is referred to when saying that they remember their lands. In addition they remember the causes involved. Hence, that the illustrious buddhas have an unhindered knowledge of past lives, including origins, lands and features, is the power of remembering previous lives. And it is held that, through this power the illustrious buddhas have precise awareness of all past stirrings of minds and mental states without exception, and knowing who has the proper prerequisites and who doesn’t, he will teach the Dharma effectively.
As stated: He has full recollection of the past states of these sentient beings. The Tathāgata knows past causes, and what past causes led to someone becoming a certain sentient being, and with this knowledge he teaches the Dharma accordingly. The Tathāgata knows the past mind states of all sentient beings. The Tathāgata knows which mental objects arose after which, the objects which made things arise, and the objects whose absence made something cease. Even if one were to try for as many aeons as there are grains of sand in the river Ganges. it would be difficult to fully express the workings of the mind of a single sentient being, one state of mind after another – that after it was in such and such a way, the mind was like this, and after that it was like this. But the Tathāgata knows the continuity of mind, each thought following the other, of all sentient beings. And if it could be conceived of, his wisdom would not reach its limit even if this was demonstrated until the very end of existence. The Tathāgata’s knowledge of past states is inconceivable and incomparable; and being immeasurable, to show its full extent is no easy matter. The Tathāgata, the bull-like Buddha, reminds sentient beings, ‘Take heed. Remember that these are the roots of virtue that cause sentient beings to be born as buddhas, as hearers and as solitary buddhas.’ It is by the power of the Buddha that they are reminded of this. The Tathāgata will consider which roots of virtue they are drawn to, through which vehicle they can be liberated and reach the point of no return, and teaches the Dharma accordingly. This is the eight tathāgata-activity of the Tathāgata.21
In terms of the power of knowing the process of death and rebirth it says: To have unhindered knowledge of the birth and death Of every sentient being and the state they’re in, Wherever in the world as far as space extends, In every detail, in each moment, is their strength. (11.39) Death is the disintegration of the faculties. Birth is to connect with the faculties. The Tathāgata has accurate and spontaneous moment-to-moment knowledge of the births and deaths within all worlds to the very reaches of space, and the great variety of karma involved. That nothing can hinder his wisdom in this regard, that it is uninhibited and fully pure in every aspect, is considered the Tathāgatas power of knowing the process of death and rebirth. And not only is it held that the Illustrious One knows the death and rebirth of all sentient beings, through his divine eye he also has a comprehensive knowledge of the immense diversity involved in the creation and destruction of universes and so forth.
As stated: The Tathāgata has the divine eye, and with this eye, buddha fields defying enumeration and extending throughout the reaches of space, throughout the vast expanse of the entire phenomenal world of the ten directions, can appear to him; and wherever sentient beings are undergoing ages of destruction and creation, he sees all. Any sentient beings that might appear, that die and are born, in higher or lower realms, and their karma, he sees all. Any bodhisattvas that appear, and their death, conception and birth, he sees all. Any buddhas who manifest the realisation of true and complete awakening, the turning of the Wheel of Dharma, the giving up of the composite nature of existence and passing into final nirvana, he sees all. Any hearers who appear, are liberated and pass into final nirvana, he sees all. Any solitary buddhas who appear, demonstrate magical powers and perfect their attainments, he sees all. Even sentient beings that cannot be seen, that do not appear to non-Buddhists who have developed the five supercognitions, nor to hearers, solitary buddhas, or bodhisattvas, appear to the divine eye of the Tathāgata. The invisible beings the Tathāgata can see just within the area of a cartwheel, are far more numerous than all the gods and humans within the worlds of the entire trichiliocosm. The realms of beings that cannot be seen are immeasurable. The Buddha considers the beings throughout all buddha realms with his divine tathāgata vision to see which sentient beings may be trained. And the Buddha appears in front of all those who are able to learn, training them without the knowledge of other beings who are not. This is the ninth tathāgata-activity of the Tathāgata.22
In terms of the power of knowing the exhaustion of defilements it says: The strength of their omniscience instantly defeats Afflictions and their imprints; and afflictions are Blocked by the insight of disciples and so forth – To know this fully without hindrance is their strength. (11.40) Afflictions refers to ignorance, attachment and so forth, and it is these that afflict the threefold world. Being that which infuses and pollutes the mind and then remains, they are called imprints (vāsanā); potential afflictions, habitual patterns, seeds and imprints are all synonymous. Although they have abandoned the afflictions through the practice of the undefiled path, hearers and solitary buddhas are not able to fully rid themselves of these. Similar to the example of removing sesame oil, flowers or the like from a pot, a piece of cloth and so on – as they have been in contact, a trace of them will remain. In the same way, although for the arhat the afflictions have been removed, there are still imprints present; and the manner of moving by jumping about that one had in the past as a monkey, or the manner of speaking to servants that one had in the past as a brahmin, which have been pacified by the illustrious one (bhagavan), have not been arrested by the former. The imprints of ignorance that remain, prevent one from fathoming phenomena, and the imprints of attachment and so forth that remain will be causes for tending towards particular physical and verbal ways. Only omniscient and awakened buddhas have abolished the imprints of ignorance, attachment and so forth, no one else. Hence, the buddhas’ complete and unobstructed knowledge of having rid themselves of all remaining imprints of the afflictions and having rid themselves of the afflictions that these imprints sustain, is considered the power of knowing the exhaustion of defilements.
As stated: Furthermore, O son of noble family, having exhausted all defilements the Tathāgata sees clearly, sees directly, that he is undefiled, his mind is liberated, his intelligence is liberated, and rests in this attainment with the thought, ‘My births are at an end – I have led a life of purity, done what needed to be done, and after this life there will for me be no more existences.’ The Tathāgata’s knowledge of having exhausted the defilements is pure, unstained, immaculate, luminous, and a true conquering of all sustaining habitual imprints. The hearers’ exhaustion of defilements is limited as they have not truly conquered the habitual imprints. The solitary buddhas’ exhaustion of defilements is limited as they do not have great compassion and eloquence. The tathāgatas’ exhaustion of defilements is perfect in every way as they have truly overcome all sustaining habitual imprints. It is embraced by great compassion, with confidence and eloquence. Nothing in the whole world can challenge it, and it is present within each moment of mind. Why? The Tathāgata has no more karmic imprints, afflictive imprints, or imprints of deluded conduct. Just as space itself is naturally pure and unaffected by dust and smoke, the Tathāgata’s awareness of the exhaustion of defilements is unaffected by any karmic or afflictive imprints. And as soon as this exhaustion of defilements is a reality, he will teach the Dharma to sentient beings who still find themselves in defiled states of grasping, so that they may rid themselves of these defiled ways and grasping: ‘O sentient beings governed by mistaken ways of thinking, you must come to properly understand how this defilement and grasping takes place!’ Thus the Tathāgata teaches them the Dharma using appropriate examples to illustrate how they can come to properly ascertain that the defilements are not genuine, and through seeing this, cut their grasping to phenomena and reach final transcendence. This, O son of noble family, is the tenth tathāgata-activity of the Tathāgata.23 And in addition to these completely perfect features, the scope of the Tathāgata’s wisdom is inconceivable, he has countless other special qualities, dwells in a state indistinguishable from the dharmakāya, and it is only space itself by which the vastness of each of his qualities can be quantified. The illustrious buddhas are the protectors for the defenceless beings drowning in the four great rivers – the rivers of desire, existence, views and ignorance – and these ten powers are fully actualised for them on the buddha ground, Universal Illumination. This will not be further elaborated on here.
It is only the buddhas who can fully comprehend all their special qualities: each pore of the form body of the illustrious buddhas, their marks and signs of a great being, their powers, confidences, unique buddha qualities and so forth. But if they were to speak of them, blessing their lifespan to last for inconceivably countless aeons, not engaging in any other activity, and express them in rapid succession, all these qualities could not be mentioned. The bodhisattvas are not able to express the buddhas’ qualities in their entirety, not to mention the solitary buddhas or hearers. To express this through an example it is said: It’s not the limit of the sky that halts a bird. It has to stop because its strength has reached its end. Disciples and the buddha heirs are likewise stopped From voicing all the sky-like buddha qualities. (11.41) It is not the sky’s limit being reached that halts the garuḍa’s journey as the wind supports its flight across the skies, but rather that it lacks the strength to continue soaring. Likewise, even when a bodhisattva has reached the inconceivable liberation of the tenth ground they will not be able to fully express the qualities of a tathāgata. And it is not the qualities being completed that prevents this sky-like boundlessness, they are thwarted by the inadequacy of their mental powers. No need to mention then how it is for the solitary buddhas and hearers trying to grasp the scope of these qualities.
That being the situation for them in relation to understanding and expressing the qualities of the buddhas, how could one such as myself, blinded by the cataracts of ignorance, have any hope of expressing the qualities of the tathāgatas when the true way of things remains hidden? To express this it was said: So how could someone such as me be able to Perceive and then convey these qualities of yours? But noble Nāgārjuna did describe them, so I put my qualms to rest and mentioned them in brief. (11.42) Although I do not really understand even a fraction of the tathāgatas’ qualities, I have disregarded my hesitation and touched on them briefly, basing myself on another. All that I have said has been explained by the noble Nāgārjuna.
In summary, this treatise has expressed the qualities of the Buddha to be profound, the reality of things (dharmatā), and vast. With regard to that: What is profound is emptiness; The vast, the other attributes. By knowing the profound and vast One will gain all these qualities. (11.43)
To explain about how the nirmāṇakāya (the emanation body) spontaneously emerges to bring about the attainment of joyous states and so forth; appearing as ordinary objects and ordinary methods for hearers, solitary buddhas and bodhisattvas,24 and appearing in ways suitable to ordinary beings, it was said: Unwavering in form, and yet again you come into the world. You manifest descent and birth, and turn the wheel of wakening And peace; thus, through compassion guiding this entire troubled world Entangled in the noose of our obsessions to the tranquil state. (11.44) Even though the Illustrious One has transcended the three realms, through his nirmāṇakāya manifestations he demonstrates, in accord with the ways of the world, the relationships of father, mother, son and so forth. And having come into the world, gives teachings he considers appropriate to the various abilities and ways of sentient beings to establish them in nirvana. This is done out of compassion, and not with aims such as fame, reward and so forth.
Thus, having established the forms of the Tathāgata, it is now explained how teaching a single vehicle as three vehicles is done with an underlying intention: To know the true reality, which is unchanging, has no types, Will be the only way that one can rid oneself of every stain. The wisdom that discerns it can’t be classified in any way. The unmatched vehicle you taught is therefore indivisible. (11.45) Without knowing the true reality of things, one will not be able to overcome all the afflictions, and as has already been explained, one cannot make any distinctions with respect to the unarisen nature that is the actual reality of all things. The actual reality of things is unchanging, since although things may seem different there are in fact no distinctions. And since there are no distinctions and no change, the wisdom that perceives this reality is also of a single nature. If the nature of wisdom was in fact multiple, it couldn’t know the actual reality of things, since it would be unable to know which aspect of the nature was the true one. But since there is only one actual reality, the wisdom that takes this reality as its object cannot be differentiated. This is why there is only one vehicle and not three, as stated: O Kāśyapa. Nirvana takes place when one understands the equality of all things; this being one thing, and not two or three.25 In the term Great Vehicle (mahāyāna), the word great (mahat) refers to the illustrious buddhas, since they have rid themselves of all ignorance and therefore possess unstained wisdom. Their vehicle is the Great Vehicle, and because of the rule ‘pṛṣodara and so forth…’ the t becomes a.26 Alternatively, the Great Vehicle is a vehicle and it is also great. Since it is where the inconceivable wisdom of the buddhas rests, incorporates all of the inconceivable divisions of things, and completely dispels ignorance, the Great Vehicle is a vehicle which is great.
‘So, if there is only one nirvana, why is it taught that the vehicles of hearers and solitary buddhas lead to final nirvana?’ To explain how these teachings are given with a particular intent it was said: Because of these corruptions that make beings lapse into misdeeds, The world lacks access to the buddhas’ province of profundity. But you, Sugata, are endowed with wisdom and compassion’s means, And made the pledge to be the liberator of these sentient beings. (11.46) It is taught that the five corruptions make the body and mind unworkable: the corruptions of sentient beings, aeons, afflictions, views and lifespan. The dominance of the afflictions quells all nobler intentions, and the world cannot therefore access the profound wisdom of the buddhas that is so hard to measure. But still the illustrious ones will not dismiss these beings as unfit vessels for liberation. The illustrious ones are filled with the means of compassion, and having in the past expressed the aspiration that they would liberate all sentient beings, will therefore not remain indifferent to their potential liberation but find means to liberate them, as alternative ways through which they can fulfil their promise certainly exists.
As there are many conditions which obstruct beings from engaging with the Great Vehicle, and yet the whole world must still be brought to the state of nirvana, it was said: Thus, like the adept who will conjure up a city to relieve The travellers bound for the jewel island of their weariness, You taught a vehicle to your disciples that will lead to peace, While teaching something different for the erudite untrammelled ones. (11.47) The example referred to here is found in the noble White Lotus of Sacred Dharma Sutra.27 To summarise its intent, just as the captain magically made a city appear so that they could rest on their way to the island of jewels, the Illustrious One teaches the two vehicles of the hearers and solitary buddhas which focus on the happiness of the peaceful state before the Great Vehicle, as a skilful way to help them reach their goal. But after they have rid themselves of the afflictions of samsara, he will indeed teach them the Great Vehicle, as they too, like the buddhas, need to complete the accumulations and eventually attain omniscience. The teaching of a single vehicle is confirmed by the Compendium of Sutras28 and other sources.
In terms of the time when the Illustrious One reaches awakening and the time he remains, it is said: O Sugata, through aeons numerous as all The dust there is, you reach perfect awakening In all the buddha fields throughout the universe – But this your secret is not commonly divulged. (11.48) The illustrious buddhas do demonstrate birth and nirvana through their nirmāṇakāya emanations, but how should one express when the complete awakening of the illustrious ones took place, which is the cause for the appearance of their emanation bodies? The aeons in which the illustrious ones realise true and complete awakening are as numerous as all the minute particles found in the universes that are the objects of the tathāgatas’ wisdom. As this is difficult to appreciate, it is not divulged to those who have not gathered previous roots of virtue; however, is explained to those few who have gathered immense merit and can appreciate it.
Having thus said something about when they reach true and complete awakening, to explain about how long they remain it is said: O Victor, how could you who were conceived By Lady Wisdom, by Compassion nursed, Pass into peace whilst all the world has not Been brought to peace, while space still has not ceased? (11.49) Since the Illustrious One is given birth to by Lady Prajñāpāramitā and nursed by Compassion, the form of the Illustrious One will remain until everyone in the world has become buddhas, and until space itself collapses.
How is this compassion of the buddhas, through which they work endlessly to care for all beings, to truly benefit them? As explained: The love you have for your relations, beings who In ignorance ingest this poisoned worldly food, A mother’s pain for poisoned child cannot compare; And thus, Protector, you do not pass into peace. (11.50) The words worldly food, refer to the five sense pleasures. To believe in and consume these is poisonous, because it leads to much suffering. And the culprit for the conviction that they are real is ignorant confusion. The love the Illustrious One has for cyclic beings who consume such poisonous worldly food, is even more sincere than the pain a mother feels when her beloved only child has been poisoned. How could someone with such compassion enter final nirvana?
To show how the illustrious ones will not pass into final nirvana when seeing the great variety of suffering that befalls the world, and how by virtue of this compassion they forgo the state of transcendence, it is said: Illustrious One, you have compassion for this world that garners pain And evil when unwisely thinking entities are real or not; They’re born and pass away, they lose the pleasant, find unpleasant things – Through love for them you spurn your peace, ignore your own transcendent state. (11.51) Those who are unwise and have a strong belief in existence of things, thinking that the karmic causal relationships are real and that one can be born as a god or human, will certainly end up suffering birth and death, and experience the pain of being separated from pleasant things and meeting with the unpleasant. And when insisting on their mistaken ideas and believing that things are non-existent, their evil ways will take them to the states of hell and so forth, as well as suffering the above mentioned consequences. When in their compassion the illustrious buddhas see the suffering of beings, they will dismiss nirvana and instead remain.
The bhikshu Chandrakirti’s way Is based upon the Treatise on The Middle Way, conforming to The scriptures and direct advice. (11.52)
Just as no other source presents This dharma in this accurate way, The wise should recognise that what Is found herein is quite unique. (11.53) Just as there is no other treatise that presents the teachings on emptiness in such an unmistaken way as the Middle Way Treatise, I encourage the wise to assess whether such a presentation of emptiness, and the way of the arguments and replies presented here, can indeed be found in any other treatise. Understand thus that those who propose that what the tradition of the Sautrāntikas claim to be the ultimate is held to be the relative by the Middle Way, are speaking without fully understanding the essential points presented in the Middle Way Treatise. And those who consider that what the Vaibhāṣikas present as the ultimate is the relative according to the Middle Way, likewise do not understand the actual point of the Treatise. This is because it makes no sense for a supramundane dharma to be in harmony with worldly dharmas, and the wise will recognise how the present tradition is an extraordinary one.
Thus, as there are some who misunderstand the Master’s intention, and in failing to grasp the actual meaning are alarmed just by his words, rejecting this world-transcending teaching, this Entry Into the Middle Way was composed to show the true and unmistaken point of the Treatise: Some, frightened by the oceanic tinge of Nagarjuna’s mind, Have kept their distance to this wonderful tradition; but right now The dew that makes his verses open like a waterlily’s buds Have settled, and the hopes of Chandrakirti, Famous Moon, are met. (11.54) ‘But were not the venerable Vasubandhu, Dignaga, Dharmapāla and so forth, in the treatises they authored, alarmed just by his words, and did they not reject that this was a genuine presentation of interdependence?’ They did indeed say that.
So how should one understand this? To explain: The scary depths of this reality presented here, is only grasped By those with some experience – though learned, others will not comprehend. Thus seeing them as self-devised traditions – those who claim there is a self, Or any other groups – place not your trust in any other school but this. (11.55) It can be seen how the misguided, who lacked the required impetus from the past to be drawn towards emptiness, could still make a connection with other philosophical traditions and be successful in ridding themselves of the afflictions related to the desire, form and formless realms, but not develop any interest in the ultimate reality of the Lord of Sages. In the same way, one should understand that, although these individuals surely possessed traits of great learning, they lacked the seed that could make them appreciate emptiness and did not therefore work towards an understanding of it. Still, even these days there are some who did put in place the conditions for an interest in emptiness in other lifetimes, and just through this influence appear to reach an understanding of the depths of emptiness, just through such an influence lose their trust in the veracity of misguided traditions and instead come to fathom emptiness. Thus, when seeing that these other traditions are simply their own creations, one should give up all fondness for any tradition that is not the Middle Way, just as one would for the traditions that promote a self. Don’t be impressed by the intellectual ways of other traditions – let only the authentic understanding of this very view of emptiness impress you.
May all the merit gathered from explaining Nāgārjuna’s way fill all of space, Their intellects, a sky obscured by the afflictions, be lit up by autumn stars, And as they catch the jewel from the cobra’s head, their minds, may the entire world Thus come to understand reality and swiftly travel to sugatahood. (11.56)
This completes the Commentary to Entering the Middle Way, elucidating the profound and the vast, composed by the master Candrakīrti, an upholder of the supreme vehicle who possessed invincible wisdom and compassion, and who by milking the painted cow defeated clinging to true existence. The quotes should be rendered as found in the sutras. And any future translators should Be conscientious and honest in making The translation comply with the root text’s commentary. This was translated from a Kashmiri manuscript by the Indian preceptor Tilaka Kalaśa and the translator Patsab Nyimadrak in the Ratnagupta temple in the Kashmiri city Anupama (Shrinagar) during the reign of the Kashmiri king Śrī Āryadeva. It was subsequently edited and finalised based on a manuscript from the eastern country of Aparānta by the Indian preceptor Kanakavarman and the same Tibetan translator in the Ramoche temple in Lhasa (Rasa). The length of the text is 11 2/3 bundles. English translation by Fredrik Liland, 2019.